White House for Sale: 
How Princes, Prime Ministers, and Premiers 
Paid Off President Trump 


Staff Report 


Committee on Oversight and Accountability 
Democratic Staff 
Rep. Jamie Raskin, Ranking Member 
U.S. House of Representatives 


January 4, 2024 


https://oversightdemocrats. house. gov/ 


Dedicated to the late Congressman Elijah E. Cummings, 
Chairman of the House Committee on Oversight and Reform 
“The memory of the righteous is a blessing.” 


FOREWORD 


Congressman Jamie Raskin 
Ranking Member 
House Committee on Oversight and Accountability 


Many reports get published in Congress every year and sink into oblivion, but this one is 
unlikely to disappear. The findings and conclusions presented by the House Committee on 
Oversight and Accountability’s Democratic staff are astounding—and they demand urgent action 
by the Congress and by the American people. 


Drawing from actual receipts and records and using the most conservative possible 
accounting methodologies, White House for Sale: How Princes, Prime Ministers, and Premiers 
Paid Off President Trump documents how, as President, Donald Trump accepted more than $7.8 
million in payments from foreign states and their leaders, including some of the world’s most 
unsavory regimes. By elevating his personal financial interests and the policy priorities of 
corrupt foreign powers over the American public interest, former President Trump violated both 
the clear commands of the Constitution and the careful precedent set and observed by every 
previous Commander-in-Chief. 


Article I, Section 9, Clause 8 of the Constitution forbids the President to accept money 
payments or gifts “of any kind whatever” from foreign governments and monarchs unless he 
obtains “the Consent of the Congress” to do so. Yet Donald Trump, while holding the office of 
president, used his business entities to pocket millions of dollars from foreign states and royalty 
and never once went to Congress to seek its consent. This report sets forth the records showing 
foreign government money—and all the spoils from royals we can find—pouring into hotels and 
buildings that the President continued to own during his presidency, all in direct violation of the 
Constitutional prohibition. 


To be sure, we know about only some of the payments that passed into former President 
Trump’s hands during just two years of his presidency from just 20 of the more than 190 nations 
in the world through just four of his more than 500 businesses. Despite the Constitution’s 
requirement that a president disclose foreign emoluments and seek Congress’s consent to keep 
them, it took Oversight Committee Democrats years of aggressive litigation against the former 
President to obtain the subset of documents from Mazars, Donald Trump’s accounting firm, that 
form the factual basis of this report. And then, in January 2023, Oversight Committee Chairman 
James Comer made the abrupt and outrageous decision to release Mazars from having to 
continue complying with the Committee’s subpoena and court-supervised settlement agreement. 
Despite Chairman Comer’s decision to bury further evidence, however, even this small slice of a 
picture of unknown proportions allows America to glimpse the rampant illegality and corruption 
of the Trump presidency. It is true that $7.8 million is almost certainly only a fraction of 
Trump’s harvest of unlawful foreign state money, but this figure in itself is a scandal and a 
decisive spur to action. 


The report’s detailed findings make clear that we don’t have the laws in place to deal with 
a president who is willing to brazenly convert the presidency into a business for self-enrichment 


3 


and wealth maximization with the collusive participation of foreign states. No other president 
had ever come close before to trying a rip-off like this simply based on vacuuming up foreign 
government money, which was the cardinal presidential offense and betrayal in the eyes of the 
Founders—an offense and betrayal made all the more striking here by the offender’s repeated 
laughable proclamations of “America First!” 


This report forces us to confront fundamental questions that the Founders faced in 
designing American institutions: What kind of government will we have? Will it be devoted to 
the common good of all the people and will it actually put the interests of the people first? Or 
will it just be a structured opportunity for private gain and self-enrichment for schemers who 
excel at self-promotion and sneer at the rule of law? In answering these questions, we have one 
decisive advantage over the Founders: we have the Founders’ own handiwork in the 
Constitution which gives us precisely the principles we need to fortify democratic self- 
government and reject the practice of political leaders selling America out to foreign powers. 


In the face of these stunning findings and conclusions, Oversight Committee Democrats 
are prepared to act in defense of the Constitution. We will develop a package of proposed 
legislative reforms to ensure that all occupants of the Oval Office abide by the Constitution’s 
unequivocal language commanding loyalty to the interests of the American people—not the 
interests of homicidal Saudi monarchs, totalitarian Chinese bureaucratic state capitalists, or other 
foreign actors looking to obtain policy favors and indulgences by paying off a president or his 
wholly owned businesses. 


Supporting and defending our Constitution against all enemies, foreign and domestic, is 
our sworn commitment in Congress. But the defense of democracy is the work of a nation, and 
we hope that all the American people will participate in it. 


mie Raskin 


anking Member 
House Committee on Oversight and Accountability 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


POLS WOT Feces tated asic sh cos ae cn Yak Berta gion is soe as sage ede he au psec ls ate ee Sea ele ahs 3 
EXCUSE SUMIMIALY 20s cetee turrets Sineasascees tisk goss eases decae aes aaeeee A ereiutiee Ss uaa 6 


Background: The Foreign Emoluments Clause, Trump’s Businesses and Foreign Conflicts, 


and the Committee’ s Investi gat Ot sci 52s iss iesctauscinvidsaticge sh aenteiidsactiand aaeddbaks Gav dkgum aehssuctantaas 17 
Report Methodology and Document Limitations...........ccecceecceeseeececeseceeceeeeeeseecaeeneeeeeeeensees 39 
People’s Repubie-Or C Witialaas. s24/ashs cub ohsbeahsadsdecse te ancdeyesecepdaesanessdauie ana wasiacepsamsaacnzeaneg iataes 45 
SAU ATADIA 3 sores cud ecanes SedetleansecwesaesSuvancedy swag sonducaeantesaaneductesndy dada padecaventeceagpaatectvands wea seadectasntecns 67 
VALE cau cocceates iat Ay schicauuiar uate onan ae sstadcluthe Nut Paagas da nus bce sdiuhamleut Olas iat R aio od eee nuc cack 83 
MJnited: Arab: BE ates :9<.ixcssasecsaysaevsinasanduxessaceducsdabounede avantmas andes calanetansiater dass apevienpabaniainastecitatouna’s 93 
Uv etd sacces Ae cesta cucgses gees oct an ace apreaeectbenscrees at de parea ince to aeseucaale nen asmiens toni cannameade ceanalnanacesae teense 101 
Wa os ses cat ecw vacua ees Saeecav in ad Gas Bay aang Na ava sada nd WA Sans ad aeng Ve a A  de eaee 104 
PHI P PMCS spacey ratcerinielvetew ica eal Wiemann tue ate lnte aescalaaciy Cee eit aceon esau 113 
IN AAV SIA astatecnaaletiniah cz cielyne ua desalaaiatacpsetedacswateeli seoseledton Tears cpu aausta shi staat Dwaea memtalitan cabedieeainentatoes 117 
STUER Clap aes ate Aca esa So ducctes duce fades eve estes actctat gp Sectcaay ceded sas asecteci wns oes voeuiterswi od gees We canadie ces ed eae um aette Mn ade 124 
Democratic Republic: of the Contos wc sockeis teed aud iodine anaabiaee 132 
PN ARN chia scp coast Achat nba led hic esate oensadaaaites ana acai ate ahicPeamud vaccine wid ins sad oli N ecard matin RED 140 
I OSOVO faecal eee es ease eee Nes eens ed ides eee adc ee ee ee oe ae 144 
Additional: Emohiment S pen ig. 05ccsceayindsesstcces sree xiossdecte Gate deads saccades tected as ee aaa 148 
Additional Countries with Accounts at Trump-Owned Businesses............c:cccccesceeeseeeteeeeeees 155 
(CONCTISTON 2 snicanesdueshlunsdansdadvaneapandasmaynadaylabawelutsbatonia syaatysnabandensetaaedned tatausa tsawiemasaetiaeasebuesiakale 156 


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 


“No Title of Nobility shall be granted by the United States: And no Person 
holding any Office of Profit or Trust under them, shall, without the Consent of the 
Congress, accept of any present, Emolument, Office, or Title, of any kind 
whatever, from any King, Prince, or foreign State.” 

Constitution of the United States, Art. I, § 9, cl. 8 


This report sets forth the results of a multi-year investigation into former President 
Donald Trump’s receipt of payments from foreign governments and foreign state-owned or state- 
controlled entities while in office. This systematic collection of foreign money was in direct 
violation of the explicit prohibition against such emoluments in the U.S. Constitution’s Foreign 
Emoluments Clause. The Committee’s investigation began under the leadership of then-Ranking 
Member Elijah E. Cummings in 2016, the year when President-elect Trump was poised to bring 
with him into the office of President of the United States a sprawling and debt-laden corporate 
empire of more than 500 businesses operating in at least 25 different countries, and yet refused to 
divest himself of these corporate assets and properties. Instead, he declared himself still open for 
business to all comers, including princes, prime ministers, premiers, and foreign governments, 
who became his active, albeit constitutionally forbidden, financial patrons.! 


In layman’s terms, an emolument is broadly defined as an “advantage, profit, or gain 
received as a result of one’s employment or one’s holding of office,” financial or otherwise, 
received either directly or indirectly.* Shrouded in complexity and secrecy, President Trump’s 
global corporate empire proved to be a magnet for emoluments from foreign governments and 
government-sponsored sources across the globe. His businesses encompassed luxury hotels all 
over the world, high-end mixed-use buildings like Trump Tower in New York City, and 
destination golf resorts. When he arrived in the White House, then-President Trump was 
determined not only to keep this well-branded global corporate empire going but also to seize a 
new and unprecedented opportunity to make it ever more lucrative for himself and his family. It 
would soon become clear that he viewed the presidency as a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for 
self-enrichment and profit maximization, courtesy of some of the most corrupt governments in 
the world. The presidency became the fulfillment of a get-rich-quick campaign he 
reportedly described as “the greatest infomercial in political history.”? 


' Letter From Ranking Member Elijah E. Cummings, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, to 
Chairman Jason Chaffetz, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform (Nov. 14, 2016) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/documents/2016-11- 
14.EEC%20to%20JC%20%28003%29.pdf). 


> See Congressional Research Service, The Emoluments Clauses of the U.S. Constitution (Jan. 27, 2021) 
(online at https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF 11086) (quoting Black ’s Law Dictionary). 


3 Committee on Oversight and Reform, Hearing with Michael Cohen, Former Attorney to President 
Donald Trump, 116th Cong, Transcript at 14, 21-22 (Feb. 27, 2019) (online at www.congress. gov/116/chrg/CHRG- 
116hhrg35230/CHRG-116hhrg35230.pdf); Cohen: Trump Described His Campaign As “The Greatest Infomercial 
in Political History,” The Hill (Feb. 27, 2019) (online at https://thehill.com/homenews/house/43 1 802-cohen-trump- 
described-his-campaign-as-the-greatest-infomercial-in-political/). 


6 


Immediately after the 2016 election, ethics experts from across the political spectrum 
read the writing on the wall and urged the new President-elect to fully divest himself of his 
business interests and place all their proceeds in a truly independent blind trust. These bipartisan 
ethics experts warned that if he did not divest, the President would remain the ultimate financial 
beneficiary of payments made to his businesses by foreign powers seeking favorable treatment 
from the government of the United States—exactly the predicament feared by the Framers of the 
Constitution and explicitly forbidden by the Constitution’s Foreign Emoluments Clause.* 


Throwing caution to the wind and the Constitution to the curb, former President Trump 
bluntly and cavalierly rejected all such bipartisan advice. He instead chose to place the “day-to- 
day” management of his businesses in the hands of his two adult sons while retaining personal 
ownership and control of all his businesses, as well as the ability to draw funds from them 
without any outside disclosure.> He also refused to divest from his business entities, including 
those benefiting significantly from business with foreign governments. Instead, former President 
Trump merely pledged that The Trump Organization would enter into no new foreign deals.° 


This transparently improper arrangement reinforced (rather than severed) his ties to his 
businesses and enabled him to prioritize his personal interests over those of the nation, as foreign 
governments and those acting on their behalf quickly began spending money at Trump properties 
in hopes of gaining the new President’s favor. Thus, the central constitutional ban on 
presidential acceptance of payments “of any kind whatever” from foreign governments was put 
in danger immediately. 


By ignoring this fundamental constitutional command, former President Trump also 
threatened to obliterate a critical and defining principle of American democracy—namely, the 
strict separation of a president’s personal financial interests from those of the nation. In 
establishing the presidency, the Framers emphasized that the President was not a term-limited 
king but a public servant whose duty was to serve the common good rather than personal 
financial interests. The U.S. Constitution emphatically and unambiguously rejected the 
monarchical system, requiring our elected chief executive to use the office solely to advance the 
interests of the American people, rather than their own personal financial and business interests. 


4 Bipartisan Group Urges Trump, Family to Divest from Private Business, Washington Post (Dec. 9, 2016) 
(online at www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/12/09/bipartisan-group-urges-trump-family-to- 
divest-from-private-business/). 


> Trump Can Quietly Draw Money from Trust Whenever He Wants, New Documents Show, Washington 
Post (Apr. 3, 2017) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-can-quietly-draw-money-from-trust- 
whenever-he-wants-new-documents-show/2017/04/03/7f4c0002-187c-1 1e7-9887-1a5314b56a08_story.html); Letter 
from Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Administrator Robin Carnahan, 
General Services Administration (Oct. 8, 2021) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house. gov/files/202 1-10- 
08.CBM%20GEC%20to%20Carnahan-GSA%20re%2001d%20Post%200 ffice“20Building%20Lease.pdf). 


® Donald Trump's New York Times Interview: Full Transcript, New York Times (Nov. 23, 2016) (online at 
www.nytimes.com/2016/11/23/us/politics/trump-new-york-times-interview-transcript.html); Trump Drops “No New 
Deals” Pledge, Politico (Jan. 11, 2017) (online at www.politico.com/story/2017/01/trump-business-ties-conflicts- 
233468). 


Given President Trump’s dramatic departures from the Constitution, the rule of law, and 
the prior unbroken history of presidential refusals to take foreign state money, as well as the 
repeated opportunities his business entanglements with foreign states created to use his office to 
advance his business dealings, Democrats on the Committee on Oversight and Accountability 
began a nearly seven-year long investigation, initiated by the late Ranking Member Elijah E. 
Cummings, advanced by Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, and now completed, based on 
available materials, by Ranking Member Jamie Raskin. As this report makes clear, it provides 
a significant glimpse into former President Trump’s foreign financial dealings—but far 
from a comprehensive account of his unprecedented efforts to use the presidency to enrich 
himself and his family in direct violation of the U.S. Constitution. 


After President Trump and the White House had refused multiple requests from the 
Committee to provide documents voluntarily, and after Mr. Trump’s longtime former attorney, 
Michael Cohen, testified before the Committee that Mr. Trump routinely prepared false financial 
statements, then-Chairman Cummings issued a subpoena to Mr. Trump’s accounting firm at the 
time, Mazars USA, LLP (Mazars). This subpoena, issued in April 2019, sought documents to 
help Congress fulfill its constitutional responsibility to determine whether President Trump had 
business interests that could impair his ability to make policy decisions in the national interest, 
whether he was complying with the Foreign and Domestic Emoluments Clauses of the 
Constitution, and whether he made accurate financial disclosures to the Office of Government 
Ethics as required by law. President Trump fought hard to keep relevant financial documents 
secret, spending years litigating in an unsuccessful effort to block the Committee’s subpoena. In 
July 2020, the U.S. Supreme Court rendered its decision in Trump v. Mazars, holding that 
President Trump was not above the law and had to comply with the Committee’s subpoena under 
a new four-part test.’ President Trump continued to fight the scope of the subpoena in lower 
courts until September 2022, when a federal district court approved a settlement between 
President Trump, Mazars, and the Committee, pursuant to which the court supervised the 
agreement.® 


However, in January 2023, upon becoming the new Chairman of the re-named 
Committee on Oversight and Accountability, Representative James Comer apparently decided to 
allow attorneys for President Trump to speak on behalf of the Committee and, acting in that 
wholly improper capacity, to release Mazars from its legal obligation to produce relevant records 
to the Committee under the court-supervised settlement. According to an email from former 
President Trump’s attorneys to Mazars, Chairman Comer authorized Mr. Trump’s attorneys to 
inform Mazars that “the Committee has no interest in forcing Mazars to complete [its production 
of documents] and is willing to release it from further obligations under the settlement 
agreement.”” In June 2023, Mr. Trump and the Committee—under Chairman Comer’s 
direction—filed a joint motion for dismissal and termination of the case. The District Court 


7 Trump v. Mazars USA, LLP, 140 S. Ct. 2019 (2020). 


8 Committee on Oversight and Reform, Press Release: Chairwoman Maloney’s Statement on Oversight 
Committee Securing Agreement to Obtain Former President Trump ’s Financial Records (Sept. 1, 2022) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/news/press-releases/chairwoman-maloney-s-statement-on-oversight- 
committee-securing-agreement-to). 


° Email from Patrick Strawbridge, Consovoy McCarthy PLLC, on behalf of Donald Trump, to Counsel for 
Mazars USA, LLP (Jan. 19, 2023) (on file with Committee). 


8 


granted the motion on July 5, 2023, ending the litigation and the court’s supervision of the 
parties’ agreement.'° 


Despite these obstacles, Committee Democrats succeeded in obtaining a subset of 
documents that shine a light on the finances of at least some of the former President’s businesses, 
despite being incomplete and lacking in significant respects because of the Chairman’s actions 
and significant gaps in the records possessed by Mazars. This report presents the analysis of 
these documents prepared by the Committee’s Democratic staff. Critically, even this subset of 
documents reveals a stunning web of millions of dollars in payments made by foreign 
governments and their agents directly to Trump-owned businesses while President Trump 
was in the White House. These payments were made while these governments were promoting 
specific foreign policy goals with the Trump Administration and even, at times, with President 
Trump himself, and as they were requesting specific actions from the United States to advance 
their own national policy objectives. 


Based on the subset of documents the Committee received from Mazars, this report 
concludes: 


e Through entities he owned and controlled, President Trump accepted, at a minimum, 
millions of dollars in foreign emoluments in violation of the United States Constitution. 
The documents obtained from former President Trump’s accounting firm and from a 
federal agency demonstrate that four Trump-owned properties together collected, at the 
least, millions of dollars in payments from foreign governments and officials that violated 
the Constitution’s prohibition on emoluments “of any kind whatever” from foreign 
governments. These payments clearly fell within the definitions of emoluments set forth 
in Article I, Section 9 of the Constitution and applied by the U.S. Department of Justice 
(DOJ) and the federal judiciary, which include payments that flow from transactional 
relationships with foreign governments or entities, including so-called “market” 
transactions. 


e President Trump’s businesses received, at a minimum, $7.8 million in foreign 
payments from at least 20 countries during his presidency. These included payments 
from foreign governments and foreign government-owned or -controlled entities to 
properties owned by Donald Trump, including Trump International Hotel in Washington, 
D.C.; Trump International Hotel in Las Vegas; Trump Tower on Fifth Avenue in New 
York; and Trump World Tower at 845 United Nations Plaza in New York. 


e President Trump never sought or received Congress’s approval to keep these foreign 
payments, as the Constitution requires. Instead of disclosing to Congress the foreign 
payments his businesses received during his presidency and requesting its consent to 
retain them pursuant to the process compelled by Article I, § 9, cl. 8—as multiple 
presidents before him had done—former President Trump actively concealed these 
payments and tried to prevent Congress from obtaining information about them. Asa 


'0 See Order, Trump v. Committee on Oversight and Accountability of the U.S. House of Representatives, et 
al., Civil Action No. 1:19-cv-01136-APM (D.D.C. July 5, 2023). 


9 


result, President Trump obstructed Congress’s duty under the Constitution to consider 
whether to permit the President to retain any of the foreign emoluments his businesses 
received. 


e The foreign nations making payments to President Trump spanned the globe and 
included several of the most corrupt and authoritarian governments on Earth. They 
ranged from the People’s Republic of China to Saudi Arabia to the Democratic Republic 
of the Congo to Malaysia to Albania to Kosovo. These countries spent—often lavishly— 
on apartments and hotel stays at Donald Trump’s properties—personally enriching 
President Trump while he made foreign policy decisions connected to their policy 
agendas with far-reaching ramifications for the United States. 


e Information available to the Committee shows that among countries patronizing 
Trump properties, China made the largest total payment to President Trump’s private 
business interests. According to the subset of documents obtained from Mazars and an 
additional document from the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), these 
payments collectively included millions of dollars from China’s Embassy in the United 
States; the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC), a Chinese state-owned 
enterprise; and Hainan Airlines Holding Company, a subsidiary of Chinese company 
HNA Group, owned by the Hainan provincial government. 


e By pocketing foreign states’ payments, President Trump repeatedly placed his personal 
financial interest and the interests of foreign wealth and power above the public 
interest, resulting in precisely the split loyalty between foreign power and the American 
people that the Framers sought to avoid by writing the Foreign Emoluments Clause 
into the Constitution. Examples include the following: 


o In 2017, President Trump did not impose sanctions on ICBC—his well-paying 
tenant in Trump Tower in New York—even though the DOJ in 2016 filed a 
complaint alleging that the bank had been among Chinese financial institutions 
that had provided accounts to a company that had allegedly conspired with a 
North Korean bank to evade U.S. sanctions. 


o He did not sanction ICBC even after former Republican Chairman Ed Royce of 
the House Foreign Affairs Committee called on President Trump to “apply 
maximum financial and diplomatic pressure” by “targeting more Chinese banks 
that do business with North Korea.”'! President Trump expressed his own 
personal sympathies and constitutional indifference on the matter in the 2016 
campaign when he stated: “I love China! The biggest bank in the world is 
from China. You know where their United States headquarters is located? 
In this building, in Trump Tower.” !” 


'! House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Press Release: Chairman Royce Statement on North Korea (Sept. 
3, 2017) (online at https://foreignaffairs house.gov/press-release/chairman-royce-statement-north-korea/). 


 Trump’s Comments After Not Attacking Nike Raise Even More Questions, Washington Post (Sept. 5, 
2018) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/news/politics/wp/2018/09/05/trumps-explanation-for-not-attacking-nike- 
raises-even-more-questions/). 


10 


o The documents provided to the Committee reveal that Saudi Arabia and its royal 
family spent at least $615,422 at Trump properties during the Trump 
Administration, and the total amount of the country’s expenditures is likely much 
higher than that. In May 2017, while Saudi Arabia was spending lavishly at 
properties he owned, President Trump signed an arms deal with the Saudi 
government worth more than $100 billion, despite reports that the country 
repeatedly used weapons to cause mass civilian casualties during its ongoing 
military intervention in Yemen.'* President Trump also cast doubt on U.S. 
intelligence assessments concluding that Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin 
Salman had ordered the murder and dismemberment of Washington Post 
contributing journalist and Saudi regime critic Jamal Khashoggi.'* Ata 
campaign rally in 2015, then-candidate Trump articulated what would 
matter most to him in any conflict between his personal financial incentives 
related to the Saudis and American values and policy goals: “Saudi Arabia, 
I get along great with all of them. They buy apartments from me. They 
spend $40 million, $50 million.” He continued, “Am I supposed to dislike 
them? I like them very much!”" 


o Over a seven-month period in 2017 and 2018, while the United Arab Emirates 
(U.A.E.) lobbied Trump Administration officials to support a blockade of Qatar 
that Saudi Arabia and the U.A.E. had imposed, the U.A.E. spent tens of thousands 
of dollars at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., through four 
different stays. For many years, President Trump had business interests in Dubai, 
and he maintained those interests while he was in office.'° In February 2017, 
just after Donald Trump took office, both Donald Trump Jr. and Eric 
Trump attended the opening of a new Trump-branded golf course in the 
U.A.E.!” 


Importantly, the foreign payments to President Trump identified in this report are likely 
only a small fraction of the total amount of such payments he received during his presidency. 
This report is not able to provide a more comprehensive account of all of the foreign emoluments 


3 Trump Signs Kushner-Negotiated $100B Saudi Arms Deal, CNN (May 20, 2017) (online at 
www.cnn.com/2017/05/19/politics/jared-kushner-saudi-arms-deal-lockheed-martin/index html); What You Need to 
Know About the Crisis in Yemen, TIME (Nov. 3, 2016) (online at https://time.com/4552712/yemen-war- 
humanitarian-crisis-famine/). 


'4 Full Text: President Donald Trump’s Statement on Saudi Arabia, Khashoggi Killing, Politico (Nov. 20, 


2018) (online at www.politico.com/story/2018/1 1/20/donald-trump-statement-saudi-arabia-khashoggi-killing- 
1008219). 


'S Trump Claims He Has “No Financial Interests in Saudi Arabia” —But He Makes Lots of Money from It, 
CNBC (Oct. 16, 2018) (online at www.cnbc.com/2018/10/16/trump-says-no-financial-interests-in-saudi-arabia-but- 
makes-money.html). 


‘6 Trump’s Business Ties in the Gulf Raise Questions About His Allegiances, New York Times (June 17, 
2017) (online at www.nytimes.com/2017/06/17/world/middleeast/trumps-business-ties-in-persian-gulf-raise- 
questions-about-his-allegiances.html). 


‘7 Trump Sons Open Dubai Golf Club as Namesake Now US President, Seattle Times (Feb. 18, 2017) 
(online at www.seattletimes.com/business/trumps-sons-eric-and-donald-jr-in-dubai-to-open-golf-club/). 


11 


former President Trump’s businesses received during the time period covered by the 
Committee’s subpoena as a result of Chairman Comer’s successful effort, in coordination with 
Trump’s attorneys, to block the production of the remaining documents in discovery as soon as 
he became Chairman in 2023, as well as the failure of President Trump to provide to Mazars—or 
Mazars’s failure to retain—many key documents. Although the Supreme Court ruled in the 
Committee’s favor—and despite the fact that a federal judge was monitoring Mazars’s ongoing 
compliance with the court-approved settlement—Chairman Comer deliberately scuttled this 
agreement. '® 


Astonishingly, soon after becoming Chairman, Representative Comer claimed: “I 
honestly didn’t even know who or what Mazars was.” For years, President Trump aggressively 
litigated the case to thwart Mazars’s compliance with the Committee, but Chairman Comer has 
blamed Democrats for “‘investigating’ Trump for six years.” Instead of honoring the court- 
approved settlement, Chairman Comer made clear what he planned to do: “I know exactly what 
I’m investigating: money the Bidens received from China.”!? As promised, Chairman Comer 
halted any further document productions relating to President Trump’s receipt of foreign 
payments—from China or any other country—and launched an investigation of President Joseph 
Biden’s son, which to date has produced no evidence of any constitutional or criminal 
wrongdoing by President Biden. 


In addition to placing his personal loyalty to Donald Trump above the institutional 
interests of Congress and the integrity of the Constitution, Chairman Comer worked with Donald 
Trump’s attorneys to bury further evidence of former President Trump’s misconduct by 
depriving the Committee’s Democratic staff of the ability to work with Mazars to conduct further 
searches for responsive records, including for any documents regarding payments potentially 
from Russia, South Korea, South Africa, and Brazil. 


Notably, the set of documents Mazars did produce—before Chairman Comer’s shocking 
decision to release the company from its obligations—contained some staggering omissions. 
Under the terms of the September 2022 settlement agreement, Mazars was required to produce: 


1. All documents from 2014 through 2018 related to any false or inaccurate information 
on President Trump’s public financial disclosures; 


2. All documents from November 2016 through 2018 regarding the Trump International 
Hotel in Washington, D.C.; and 


'8 Email from Patrick Strawbridge, Consovoy McCarthy PLLC, on behalf of Donald Trump, to Counsel for 
Mazars USA LLP (Jan. 19, 2023); Letter from Ranking Member Jamie Raskin to Chairman James Comer, 
Committee on Oversight and Accountability (Mar. 12, 2023) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/FINAL%202023.03.12.%20JBR%2 
0to%20Comer%20re%20Mazars%20BofA%20Subpoena.pdf); Comer Stymies Probe into Trump Tax Records, 
House Democrats Say, Washington Post (Mar. 13, 2023) (online at 
www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2023/03/13/trump-tax-records-investigation/); Order, Trump v. Committee on 
Oversight and Accountability of the U.S. House of Representatives, et al., Civil Action No. 1:19-cv-01136-APM 
(D.D.C. July 5, 2023). 


'S House Republicans Quietly Halt Inquiry into Trump’s Finances, New York Times (Mar. 13, 2023) 
(online at www.nytimes.com/2023/03/13/us/politics/house-trump-finances-investigation.html). 


12 


3. All documents from 2017 through 2018 regarding any financial transactions between 
President Trump and any foreign or domestic state agency or government official.”° 


For each of these categories, however, key documents were apparently never provided to 
or retained by Mazars. 


For example, with regard to the first category, the Committee’s Democratic staff 
specifically requested information regarding a $20 million loan made by Daewoo, a South 
Korean commercial entity, that was not reported on President Trump’s 2015, 2016, or 2017 
public financial disclosures.*! Mazars responded that it had no documents related to this loan. 
With regard to the second category, the Committee’s Democratic staff specifically requested 
hotel guest ledgers covering the 2017 presidential inauguration. Although Mazars provided hotel 
guest ledgers for various other time periods, it responded that it did not have ledgers covering the 
2017 inauguration. And with regard to the third category, the Committee’s Democratic staff 
specifically requested information regarding ICBC’s nearly two-million dollar a year lease in 
Trump Tower. Once again, Mazars represented that it had no responsive documents. 


The myriad payments by foreign governments, royalty, state-owned companies, and 
foreign agents revealed in the documents that Mazars did produce, as well as in public records, 
raise two distinct yet intertwined constitutional concerns. First, President Trump’s 
unprecedented acceptance of these hidden foreign payments clearly violated the 
Constitution’s prohibition against a president’s acceptance of foreign state emoluments 
without Congress’s consent. Second, President Trump’s failure to comply with the Foreign 
Emoluments Clause and to uphold his oath of office produced the exact kinds of 
presidential corruption and conflicts between the President’s personal financial interests 
and the public interest that this constitutional provision was designed to prevent. As James 
Madison wrote, the Foreign Emoluments Clause was adopted due to “the necessity of preserving 
foreign ministers and other officers of the U.S. independent of external influence.””” As 
demonstrated throughout this report, Donald Trump’s business interests provided an irresistible 
entry point for external influence in American foreign policy and a continuing source of 
corruption in Trump’s conduct of U.S. foreign policy. It is these two linked concerns that this 
report seeks to bring to light and begin to remedy. 


The Framers assumed that future presidents would comply with the Constitution’s 
specific requirement to seek Congress’s consent in order to retain any and all foreign 
emoluments being dangled before them. Before the Trump Administration, every president had 
done just that. The Framers clearly never envisioned a president who would simply disregard the 


20 See Stipulated Agreement, attached as Exhibit A to Order, Donald J. Trump, et al. v. Committee on 
Oversight and Reform of the U.S. House of Representatives, et al., Civil Action No. 1:19-cv-01136-APM (D.D.C. 
Sept. 11, 2022). 


>! Trump Owed Hidden Debt While in Office, Forbes (Dec. 4, 2022) (online at 
www forbes.com/sites/danalexander/2022/12/04/trump-owed-hidden-debt-while-in-office/). 


22 2 The Records of the Federal Convention of 1787, at 389 (Max Farrand ed., 1911) (Madison’s notes) 
(online at https://constitution.congress.gov/browse/essay/artl-S9-C8-2/ALDE _00013205/HALDF 00020473). 


3 


constitutional wall of separation between the president’s personal finances and foreign 
government money inducements. 


The unprecedented scope and scale of Mr. Trump’s receipt of unconstitutional foreign 
funds—and the failure of the current statutory regime to ensure an effective and timely response 
to his violations of the Constitution—demonstrate the pressing need to overhaul ethics and 
disclosure laws to protect essential anti-corruption principles in our law and Constitution from 
such flagrant Executive Branch abuse. 


Congress now must decide how to respond. This report urges Congress to consider 
adopting a new legislative disclosure regime to help Congress obtain the information it needs to 
perform its assigned constitutional function of evaluating—and either approving or rejecting— 
the acceptance of foreign government emoluments by the president and other federal officials. 
This report also recommends that Congress consider instituting a more formal procedure for 
presidents and other officials to seek Congress’s permission when they receive and want to retain 
such emoluments. In the meantime, this investigation will continue to inform Congress and the 
American people about how to prevent senior public officials from taking advantage of their 
positions to reap private financial windfalls from foreign states—not only during but 
immediately before and after taking public office. Further, while this report focuses on former 
President Trump’s violations of the Constitution’s Foreign Emoluments Clause, the Mazars 
documents also reveal a pattern of payments from domestic individuals, entities, and government 
agencies that raise significant potential conflicts of interest and potential violations of the 
Constitution’s Domestic Emoluments Clause through expenditures at Trump-owned businesses. 
These will be the focus of a subsequent report. 


The chart below identifies spending by foreign governments and entities at Trump-owned 
properties, all in violation of the Constitution’s Foreign Emoluments Clause, as reflected in the 
limited records produced to the Committee by Mazars and identified in publicly available 
information: 


Total Spending : ‘ 
Country Identified23 Trump Businesses Patronized 
e Trump Tower 
China $5,572,548 e Trump International Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 
e Trump International Hotel (Las Vegas, NV) 
: : Trump World Tower 
Sande arabia $01,422 Trump International Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 


3 This chart reflects charges that the Mazars records and public records show were incurred by foreign 
nations at the Trump International Hotels in Washington, D.C., and in Las Vegas. For charges incurred by foreign 
nations at Trump World Tower or Trump Tower (both in New York), which all pertain to real estate owned or 
rented by foreign governments or entities, this report uses common charges or rent payments reflected in records 
produced by Mazars or in public information to estimate total payments during former President Trump’s 
presidency. For example, for units in Trump World Tower owned by foreign governments or entities, the Mazars 
records cover only charges paid in 2018. However, when public records show that the same foreign governments or 
entities owned these units throughout the Trump presidency, this report uses the common (base) charges paid in 
2018 to estimate the total of such charges paid by the specified foreign nations during the entire Trump presidency. 
Similarly, a public record reflects that the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China leased property at Trump 


14 


Qatar $465,744 e Trump World Tower 


e Trump World Tower 


Runyan aia e Trump International Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 
Mods Soa Oe : ae arene (Washington, D.C.) 
Malaysia $248,962 e Trump International Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 
etemaaisen Sian ; ie Mini Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 
Philippines $74,810 e Trump International Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 
United pra $65,225 e Trump International Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 
Emirates 
sesame ot Cais $25,171 e Trump International Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 
Kazakhstan $23,772 e Trump International Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 
Thailand $11,340 e Trump International Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 
Self-Declared 
Turkish Republic of $8,800 e Trump International Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 
Northern Cyprus 
Mongolia $8,486 e Trump International Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 
Lebanon $7,720 e Trump International Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 
Albania $6,002 e Trump International Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 
Kosovo $4,950 e Trump International Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 
Latvia $2,739 e Trump International Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 
Turkey $1,894 e Trump International Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 
Hungary $1,011 e Trump International Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 
Cyprus $590 e Trump International Hotel (Washington, D.C.) 


In addition, records provided to the Committee by Mazars indicate that Azerbaijan, 
Georgia, Namibia, Romania, and Costa Rica had accounts at a Trump-owned property after 


Tower, New York with an annual base rent of $1.9 million starting in 2008 and continuing at least through the 
expiration of the lease in October 2019. This report estimates the total rent payments from February 2017 through 
October 2019 based on that annual base rent. 


ite) 


Donald Trump was elected President, but Mazars did not provide any documents detailing the 
purposes or amounts of these countries’ expenditures. 


16 


BACKGROUND: THE FOREIGN EMOLUMENTS CLAUSE, TRUMP’S BUSINESSES 
AND FOREIGN CONFLICTS, AND THE COMMITTEE’S INVESTIGATION 


At the time of his election, Mr. Trump ran numerous businesses centered in the real estate 
and hospitality industries alongside his three adult children—Donald Jr., Ivanka, and Eric—who 
all played prominent roles in those businesses.*4 Mr. Trump refused to divest from these 
business interests and claimed that “the president can’t have a conflict of interest,” registering a 
modern echo of the royalist credo that “the king can do no wrong.”*° This decision raised 
immediate concern that he would be prejudiced by foreign influence and would not fulfill his 
oath to “preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States,” including the 
categorical requirement in the Foreign Emoluments Clause that a president seek and obtain 
Congress’s permission before accepting any payment from a foreign state.*° 


The Foreign Emoluments Clause: “Sweeping and Unqualified” 
Article I, Section 9 of the Constitution provides: 


No Title of Nobility shall be granted by the United States: And no Person 
holding any Office of Profit or Trust under them, shall, without the Consent of 
the Congress, accept of any present, Emolument, Office, or Title, of any kind 
whatever, from any King, Prince, or foreign State.”’ 


For decades, the DOJ has recognized that this prohibition is “sweeping and unqualified” 
and “directed against every kind of influence by foreign governments upon officers of the United 
States, based on our historic policies as a nation.””* It has been well understood in our history 
that the Foreign Emoluments Clause prevents the president from accepting any profit, advantage, 


4 Growing Up Trump, TIME (Aug. 11, 2015) (online at https://time.com/3990496/donald-trump- 
children/). 


25 Donald Trump’s New York Times Interview: Full Transcript, New York Times (Nov. 23, 2016) (online 
at www.nytimes.com/2016/11/23/us/politics/trump-new-york-times-interview-transcript.html); Donald Trump’s 
Complex Businesses Bring Potential Conflicts of Interest, Wall Street Journal (Nov. 15, 2016) (online at 
www.wsj.com/articles/donald-trumps-complex-businesses-bring-potential-conflicts-of-interest- 1479221276); Trump 
Could Run Afoul of This Obscure Constitutional Clause, CNBC (Nov. 23, 2016) (online at 
www.cnbc.com/2016/1 1/21/trump-could-run-afoul-of-this-obscure-constitutional-clause html). 


26 Id.; U.S. Constitution, Article II § 1, cl. 8. 


27 U.S. Constitution, Article I, § 9, cl. 8. The Constitution also contains a Domestic Emoluments Clause 
which mandates that the “President shall, at stated Times, receive for his Services, a Compensation which shall 
neither be increased nor diminished during the Period for which he shall have been elected, and he shall not receive 
within that Period any other Emolument from the United States, or any of them.” U.S. Constitution, Article II, § 1, 
cl. 7. In addition to violations of the Foreign Emoluments Clause, the Mazars documents reveal a pattern of 
payments from domestic individuals, entities, and government agencies that raise significant potential conflicts of 
interest and potential violations of the Domestic Emoluments Clause through expenditures at Trump businesses, 
which will be the focus of a subsequent report. 


28 Applicability of the Emoluments Clause to Non-Government Members of ACUS, 17 Op. O.L.C. 114 
(1993) (online at www.justice.gov/file/20456/download); Department of Justice, Office of Legal Counsel, Proposal 
That the President Accept Honorary Irish Citizenship, 1 Op. O.L.C. Supp. 278 (1963) (online at 
www.justice. gov/d9/olc/opinions/1963/05/3 1/op-olc-supp-v001-p0278_0.pdf). 


17 


gain, or benefit derived from private commercial transactions with a foreign government unless 
Congress consents.”° 


The adoption of the Foreign Emoluments Clause reflected a defining and fundamental 
break from monarchy. In royal society, a king’s private hereditary and commercial interests were 
coextensive with the wealth of his kingdom. But in American Constitutional democracy, the 
elected president’s job is to “take care that the laws be faithfully executed,” and, accordingly, he 
or she is limited to a fixed presidential salary and may not collect any outside payments from 
foreign states or royalty.*° 


Thus, Article II of the Constitution, which defines the powers of the Executive Branch, 
gave the president significantly less authority to demand advice on personal matters than the 
English king possessed. Whereas George III could order his subjects on the Privy Council to 
assist in managing his personal landholdings based on their obligation to “advise for the King’s 
honour” and to “serve their ‘sovereign lord,’” George Washington had no comparable authority, 
but could only obtain cabinet opinions on public matters “relating to the Duties of their ... 
Offices.”! 


Moreover, the Framers emphasized that because the English king ruled for life, and 
because his wealth was closely bound up with that of his nation, he actually had a greater stake 
in the long-term interests of his kingdom, and hence, was less susceptible to foreign corruption 
than American presidents, who held office for a limited term, did not enjoy the same access to 
public wealth, and would be focused on their personal interests after their terms in office 
ended.*” This difference, in the Framers’ view, underscored the critical need for constitutional 
protection against foreign emoluments and the heightened risk that presidents of the new nation 
would act in their own financial interests rather than those of the American people. 


Viewed in this historical context, Donald Trump’s shocking treatment throughout his 
presidency of the Foreign Emoluments Clause as a risible suggestion, rather than a foundational 
requirement of our democracy, threatened to undermine the rigorous separation of personal 
financial interests and official duties that the Framers deliberately crafted. Through his pervasive 


>? See, e.g., Brief of Amici Curiae by Certain Legal Historians on Behalf of Appellants, Citizens for 
Responsibility and Ethics in Washington et al. v. Trump, No. 18-474 (2nd Cir. 2018) (online at 
http://guptawessler.com/wp-content/uploads/20 18/05/Doc-49-Legal-Historians-amicus-brief.pdf). 


39 U.S. Constitution, Article II, § 3. 
3! Akhil Reed Amar, America’s Constitution: A Biography at 187 (2005). 


32 See James Madison’s Version [18 June 1787], National Archives Founders Online (online at 
https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Hamilton/0 1-04-02-0098-0003); Republican Government, Records of the 
Federal Convention [1:134; Madison, 6 June 1787] (online at https://press- 
pubs.uchicago.edu/founders/documents/v1ch4s12.html); Debates Which Arose In the House of Representatives of 
South Carolina on the Constitution Framed for the United States at 12 (1831) (online at 
https://books.google.com/books?id=f06EhGPTz74C &pg=X&ved=2ahUKEwjrvMjp_cblAhUywVkKHc6eCgQQ6A 
EwAHoECAgQA Q#v=onepage&q=%22might%20receive%20a%20bribe%20which%20would%20enable%20him 
%20to%20live%20in%20greater%20splendor%20in%20another%20country%20than%20his%200wn%3B%20and 
%20when%20out%200f%20o0ffice%2C%20he%20was%20n0%20more%20interested%20in%20the%20prosperity 
%200f%20his%20country%20than%20any%20other%20patriotic%.20citizen%22 &f=false). 


18 


violations of the Clause, Trump in effect sought to govern as a get-rich-quick king, rather than an 
elected president acting in the exclusive fiduciary interest of the people. 


As one federal court has observed, the Foreign Emoluments Clause “was unquestionably 
adopted against a background of profound concern on the part of the Framers over possible 
foreign influence upon the President (and, to be sure, upon other federal officials).”** At the end 
of the American Revolution, the Founders feared that foreign government influence would 
corrupt the fledging American political experiment. In testament to the prominence of this fear, 
and in rejection of the traditional gift-giving customs of eighteenth-century European diplomacy, 
the Articles of Confederation—not known for their restrictive nature—prohibited the receipt of 
any “present, emolument, office, or title of any kind whatever, from any king, prince, or foreign 
State.”4 


A decade later, at the Constitutional Convention, the delegates were “deeply concerned 
that foreign interests would try to use their wealth to tempt public servants and sway the foreign 
policy decisions of the new government.”*° For that reason, a similar anti-foreign corruption 
provision was added, without noted debate, to the Constitution.*° The Constitution’s drafters 
provided a single exception to this categorical prohibition against foreign government 
emoluments for cases in which explicit congressional consent is granted to allow a president to 
retain them.*” The retention of the Foreign Emoluments Clause by the Framers reflected their 
concern about the continuing risks of foreign corruption entangling high-ranking American 
officials. It is notably “one of the few phrases to make the jump from the Articles of 
Confederation to the Federal Constitution, and it did so despite being a difficult provision to 
follow.”® 


The carve-out allowing emoluments from foreign states only when Congress grants 
approval underscores both the breadth and purpose of the Foreign Emoluments Clause. By 
submitting an emolument for congressional approval, an officeholder “brings transparency and 
accountability to transactions that might otherwise remain buried, forcing federal officeholders to 


33 Dist. of Columbia v. Trump, 315 F. Supp.3d 875, 896 (D. Md. 2018) (citing Zephyr Teachout, Corruption 
in America: From Benjamin Franklin’s Snuff Box to Citizens United 1-5 (2014)). 


34 Articles of Confederation, art VI, 4 1 (online at www.archives.gov/milestone-documents/articles-of- 
confederation#transcript); Dist. of Columbia v. Trump, 315 F. Supp.3d 875, 888-89 (D. Md. 2018) (citing Zephyr 
Teachout, Corruption in America: From Benjamin Franklin’s Snuff Box to Citizens United 1-5 (2014)). 


35 Dist. of Columbia vy. Trump, 315 F. Supp.3d at 896 (quoting Zephyr Teachout, The Anti-Corruption 
Principle, 94 Cornell L. Rev. 341, 361 (2009)) (online at 
https://scholarship.law.cornell.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cg1?article=3 123 &context=clr). 


36 See The Emoluments Clauses and the Presidency: Background and Recent Developments, Congressional 
Research Service, at 2 (Nov. 5, 2019 (online at https://crsreports.congress. gov/product/pdf/R/R45992) (citing The 
Records of the Federal Convention of 1787, at 389 (Max Farrand ed., 1911)). 


37 Deborah S. Sills, The Foreign Emoluments Clause: Protecting Our National Security Interests, 26 
Brooklyn Works, Journal of Law & Policy 63, 70-71 (2018) (online at 
https://orooklynworks.brooklaw.edu/jlp/vol26/iss1/2/). 


38 Zephyr Teachout, Gifts, Offices, and Corruption, 107 Nw. U. L. Rev. 30, 39 (2012) (online at 
https://scholarlycommons. law northwestern.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1039&context=nulr_online). 


19 


examine their judgments and opening the entire arrangement to probing scrutiny.”*? Congress 
must validate a transaction as not influencing a federal officeholder’s judgment, or else “must 
accept political responsibility for unleashing foreign money, with all its corrupting and corrosive 
influence, into the halls of federal power.”*° Further, the Clause is intended to reach not only 
clear instances of guid pro quo corruption, to which Congress would never rationally consent, 
but a// transactions, including ostensible market transactions, through which a foreign 
government could subtly curry favor and ingratiate itself with any person holding an “Office of 
Profit or Trust.’”*! 


Throughout the history of the Republic, both the Executive and Legislative Branches 
have strictly adhered to the spirit and letter of the Foreign Emoluments Clause. In 1830, 
President Andrew Jackson petitioned Congress to keep a gold medal presented to him by 
Colombian President Simon Bolivar. Congress rejected his request and required that the medal 
be “deposited in the Department of State.”* In 1840, President Martin Van Buren personally 
refused multiple gifts from the Imam of Muscat, explaining that in doing so, he was observing a 
“fundamental law of the Republic which forbids its servants from accepting presents from 
foreign States or Princes.” President Van Buren wrote, “I deem it my duty to lay the 
proposition before Congress for such disposition as they may think fit to make of it.”** Congress 
instructed him to give the items to the State Department or sell the items and give the proceeds to 
the U.S. Treasury.* In 1862, during the Civil War, President Abraham Lincoln informed 
Congress that the King of Siam had personally presented him with a ceremonial sword and two 
elephant tusks, amongst other favors.*° As beloved as Lincoln was to the Republican-controlled 
Congress, it ordered him to deposit the gifts with the Department of the Interior.‘ 


39 Norman L. Eisen, Richard Painter, and Laurence H. Tribe, The Emoluments Clause: Its Text, Meaning, 
and Application to Donald J. Trump, at 7, Brookings Governance Studies (Dec. 16, 2016) (online at 
www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/gs_121616 emoluments-clausel .pdf). 


40 Td. (citing Zephyr Teachout, Gifts, Offices, and Corruption, 107 Northwestern University Law Review 
Colloquy 30, 36 (2012)). 


Al Td. 


” Id.; Message from the President of the United States 3 (Jan. 22, 1834), in Message from the President of 
the United States to the Two Houses of Congress at the Commencement of the First Session of the Twenty-Third 
Congress 259 (1833). 


8 Zephyr Teachout, Gifts, Offices, and Corruption, 107 Northwestern University Law Review Colloquy 30, 
42 (2012) (citing 14 Abridgment of the Debates of Congress from 1789 to 1856 141 (Thomas Hart Benton ed., 
1860)). 


4 


4 The American Presidency Project, Martin Van Buren, Special Message to Congress (online at 
www.presidency.ucsb.edu/node/200980) (accessed Dec. 8, 2023). 


45. S.J. Res. 4, 26th Cong., 5 Stat. 409 (1840) (enacted). 


46 Lincoln to Thai King: Thanks but No Thanks for the Elephants, State Journal-Register (Apr. 1, 2018) 
(online at www.sj-r.com/story/news/2018/04/01/lincoln-to-thai-king-thanks/12849296007/). 


47 See J. Res. 20, 37th Cong. (1862) (“A Resolution providing for the Custody of the Letter and Gifts from 
the King of Siam”). U.S. Senate, Party Division (online at 
www.senate.gov/pagelayout/history/one_item_and_teasers/partydiv.htm) (accessed Dec. 12, 2023); U.S. House of 
Representatives, Party Divisions of the House of Representatives, 1789 to Present (online at 

https://history house.gov/Institution/Party-Divisions/Party-Divisions/) (accessed Dec. 12, 2023); White House, 
Abraham Lincoln The 16th President Of The United States (online at www.whitehouse.gov/about-the-white- 


20 


In the modern age, the treatment of honors received by Presidents John F. Kennedy and 
Barack Obama from foreign nations once again confirmed the broad scope of the Foreign 
Emoluments Clause. In 1963, the Irish Government awarded President Kennedy honorary Irish 
citizenship. Reiterating the conclusion that the Foreign Emoluments Clause was “directed 
against every kind of influence by foreign governments upon officers of the United States, based 
on our historic policies as a nation,” the DOJ determined that acceptance “would fall within the 
spirit, if not the letter” of the Clause’s prohibition.** President Kennedy declined the honor.*? In 
2009, President Obama accepted the Nobel Peace Prize only after the DOJ determined that the 
selection process was independent from the influence of the Norwegian government. In reaching 
this conclusion, however, the DOJ Office of Legal Counsel (OLC) once again affirmed that the 
Clause applies to the President because the “President surely ‘holds an Office of Profit or 
Trust.’””°° President Obama promptly donated the $1.4 million Nobel Prize money to charity.*! 


In advisory opinions issued during the modern era, the DOJ has broadly defined 
“emolument” as reaching the benefits, gains, or advantages that flow from transactional business 
relationships with foreign governments or entities, including private transactions.*” Moreover, 
federal district courts that addressed this issue in cases brought against then-President Trump 
have likewise concluded that the Clause reaches profits arising from private or “market” 


house/presidents/abraham-lincoln/) (accessed Dec. 13, 2023). 


48 Proposal That the President Accept Honorary Irish Citizenship, 1 Op. O.L.C. Supp. 278 (1963) (online 
at www.justice.gov/d9/olc/opinions/1963/05/3 1/op-olc-supp-v001-p0278_0.pdf). 


* Blumenthal, Dems to Sue Trump Over Emoluments Clause, New Haven Register (June 14, 2017) (online 
at www nhregister.com/connecticut/article/Blumenthal-Dems-to-sue-Trump-over-Emoluments-11313611.php). 


3° Applicability of the Emoluments Clause and the Foreign Gifts and Decorations Act to the Presidents 
Receipt of the Nobel Peace Prize, 33 Op. O.L.C. 370, 374 (2009) (online at 
www.justice.gov/d9/opinions/attachments/2020/12/22/2009-12-07-potus-nobel.pdf). President Trump did not 
dispute that the Foreign Emoluments Clause applied to the President in litigation challenging his receipts of foreign 
payments that were dismissed on standing grounds. Dist. of Columbia v. Trump, 315 F. Supp. 3d 875, 880 (D. Md. 
2018) (finding the Foreign Emoluments Clause applies to the President because amicus curiae raised issue); 
Blumenthal v. Trump, 373 F. Supp. 3d 191, 196 n.3 (D.D.C. 2019) (“The parties do not dispute that the [Foreign 
Emoluments] Clause applies to the President.’’). 


5! The White House, Press Release: The President Donates Nobel Prize Money to Charity (Mar. 11, 2010) 
(online at https://obamawhitehouse.archives. gov/the-press-office/president-donates-nobel-prize-money-charity). 


* Applicability of Emoluments Clause to Proposed Service of Government Employee on Comm’n of Int’! 
Historians, 11 Op. O.L.C. 89, 90 (1987) (online at www.justice. gov/d9/olc/opinions/1987/07/3 1/op-olc-v011- 
p0089_0.pdf) (The Foreign Emoluments Clause encompasses “every kind of influence by foreign governments upon 
officers of the United States” due to its “expansive language and underlying purpose.”); Applicability of the 
Emoluments Clause to Non-Government Members of ACUS, 17 Op. O.L.C. 114 (1993) (online at 
www.justice.gov/file/20456/download) (finding that the Foreign Emoluments Clause does not permit a part-time 
federal officer to receive income, earned in market transactions, from a private business partnership that includes 
earnings from a foreign government client, even where the federal officer did not represent or interact with the 
foreign client); Memorandum for H. Gerald Staub, Office of Chief Counsel, NASA, from Samuel A. Alito, Jr. , 
Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, Re. Emoluments Clause Questions raised by NASA 
Scientists Proposed Consulting Arrangement with the University of New South Wales (May 23, 1986) (online at 
www.politico.com/f/?id=00000 158-b547-db 1 e-al f9-ff7f60920001) (concluding summarily that a “stipend or 
consulting fee from a foreign government would ordinarily be considered an ‘emolument’ within the meaning of the 
constitutional prohibition” even when the work was performed in the employee’s private business capacity). 


21 


transactions.°> The opinions are consistent with the expansive language of the Clause, which 
refers to “any present, Emolument, Office, or Title, of any kind whatever,” and also the Framers’ 
intent to protect against the possibility that foreign nations would propose personal business 
transactions with American federal officials to obtain preferential policy treatment from them.™ 


Former President Trump’s shocking departure from these deeply established and long- 
observed principles caused significant public controversy during his Administration. Although 
he never sought congressional permission to keep any of the millions of dollars he collected from 
foreign governments and foreign government-owned companies, the American public took 
notice of the rampant flow of funds to his businesses from these sources. The attorneys general 
of the District of Columbia and Maryland, Members of Congress, several public interest groups, 
and others brought or supported legal actions to try to stop these violations of the Foreign 
Emoluments Clause. Ultimately, the lawsuits were never decided on the merits because the 
courts dismissed them on threshold procedural grounds, including that the parties lacked legal 
standing to sue or that the litigation became moot after Donald Trump left office.* 


As one of those courts concluded with respect to former President Trump: 


[S]ole or substantial ownership of a business that receives hundreds of thousands or 
millions of dollars a year in revenue from one of its hotel properties where foreign and 
domestic governments are known to stay (often with the express purpose of cultivating 
the President’s good graces) most definitely raises the potential for undue influence, and 
would be well within the contemplation of the [Foreign and Domestic Emoluments] 
Clauses. °° 


President Trump’s refusal to divest from his expansive business empire and 
corresponding refusal to stop doing business with foreign governments and royalty set up the 
likelihood of repeated breaches of the Foreign Emoluments Clause and a clash between his 
business interests and his obligations to the nation that existed throughout his Administration. 
Both the constitutional violations and the ethical conflicts of interest came to pass in strikingly 
swift, vivid, and nefarious ways. 


Donald Trump’s Refusal to Divest from His Businesses Upon Entering Office and 
Resulting Foreign Conflicts 


President Trump entered office with two primary sets of business assets particularly 
susceptible to foreign influence: his domestic business holdings, including hotels and real estate, 


% Dist. of Columbia v. Trump, 315 F. Supp. 3d 875 (D. Md. 2018); Blumenthal v. Trump, 373 F. Supp. 3d 
191 (D.D.C. 2019). 


*4U.S. Constitution, Article I, § 9, cl. 8. 


55 See Congressional Research Service, The Emoluments Clauses of the U.S. Constitution, at 2 (Jan. 27, 
2021) (citing Citizens for Responsibility & Ethics in Washington v. Trump, No. 17-CV-458 (S.D.N.Y.); Dist. of 
Columbia v. Trump, No. 17-1596 (D. Md.); and Blumenthal v. Trump, No. 17-1154 (D.D.C.)) (online at 
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF 1 1086). 


56 Dist. of Columbia v. Trump, 315 F. Supp. 3d 875, 899 (D. Md. 2018). 


22 


which were positioned to reap revenues from foreign government or state-linked customers; and 
his business holdings abroad, which were also positioned to reap revenues while being directly 
subject to the regulation and oversight of foreign governments. As one federal appellate judge 
explained in one of the cases brought against former President Trump under the Emoluments 
Clause arising out of precisely this conflict: 


Governments and their diplomats perceive it as crucial to their success in diplomacy with 
the United States to secure the personal goodwill of the President and avoid the risk of 
incurring his displeasure. The President’s favor is a lucrative prize for a foreign diplomat 
whose visits to our country often have the purpose of seeking some favorable action from 
the government which the President largely controls. ... In addition, the President, 
according to the allegations of the complaint, has announced to the world his favoritism 
for nations that patronize his businesses. It follows with undeniable logic that the envoys 
of foreign nations, who are free to choose equivalent venues, will be strongly motivated 
to choose the President’s establishments, so as to advance their objective of currying the 
President’s favor, and to avoid the risk of displeasing him by choosing his competitors.>’ 


This concern was borne out shortly after Mr. Trump’s election in 2016, when 
approximately 100 foreign diplomats from a range of foreign governments gathered at a 
promotional event for the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C. As the Washington 
Post reported: 


“Believe me, all the delegations will go there,” said one Middle Eastern diplomat who 
recently toured the hotel and booked an overseas visitor. The diplomat said many stayed 
away from the hotel before the election for fear of a “Clinton backlash,” but that now it’s 
the place to be seen. 


In interviews with a dozen diplomats, many of whom declined to be named because they 
were not authorized to speak about anything related to the next U.S. president, some said 
spending money at Trump’s hotel is an easy, friendly gesture to the new president. 


“Why wouldn’t I stay at his hotel blocks from the White House, so I can tell the new 
president, ‘I love your new hotel!’ Isn’t it rude to come to his city and say, ‘I am staying 
at your competitor?’” said one Asian diplomat. 


Guests at the Trump hotel have begun parking themselves in the lobby, ordering 
expensive cocktails, hoping to see one of the Trump family members or the latest Cabinet 
pick. One foreign official hoped Trump, famous for the personal interest he takes in his 
businesses, might check the guest logs himself.°* 


Between Mr. Trump’s election and his assumption of office, both Republican and 
Democratic ethics experts urged Donald Trump to divest from his business holdings and place 


57 Citizens for Responsibility & Ethics in Washington v. Trump, 971 F.3d 102 (2d Cir. 2020). 


%8 For Foreign Diplomats, Trump Hotel Is Place to Be, Washington Post (Nov. 18, 2016) (online at 
www.washingtonpost.com/business/capitalbusiness/2016/11/18/9da9c572-ad18-11e6-977a- 
1030f822fc35_story.html). 


23 


them in an independent blind trust to avoid the appearance of divided loyalties. One letter, 
signed by 29 such experts, issued a blunt warning: 


As long as you continue to maintain ownership of The Trump Organization, no other 
steps that you take will prevent the serious conflicts of interest, appearance of conflicts, 
and Emoluments Clause problems that will exist throughout your presidency. In these 
circumstances, you cannot separate the presidency from your business enterprises.>? 


Donald Trump cavalierly ignored this warning. Instead, before entering office, Mr. 
Trump transferred nearly all of his business holdings, including the four properties discussed in 
this report, into the Donald J. Trump Revocable Trust. This trust, however, was anything but 
independent. It was controlled by two trustees: Donald Trump Jr. and Trump Organization 
Chief Financial Officer Allen Weisselberg. Although this structure created the illusion of 
separation between Mr. Trump and his business interests, in reality, President Trump retained 
effective control over, and the complete financial benefit of, his businesses.°° 


By its own terms, the “purpose of the Trust is to hold assets for the benefit of Donald J. 
Trump.”°! Mr. Trump Jr. and Mr. Weisselberg managed the Trust accordingly and could 
“distribute net income or principal to Donald J. Trump at his request.”°* President Trump was 
able to quietly draw down any money from his trust whenever he wanted as well as receive 
reports on any profit, or loss, on his businesses. 


For example, in 2019, the Committee obtained documents and testimony showing 
evidence that both President Trump and the Donald J. Trump Revocable Trust retmbursed Mr. 


» Ethics Advocates Warn Trump That He Needs to Do More to Divest from Family Business, Washington 
Post (Jan. 2, 2017) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/01/02/ethic-advocates-warn- 
trump-that-he-needs-to-do-more-to-divest-from-family-business/). Then-Ranking Member Cummings hosted a 
forum in December 2016 with bipartisan ethics experts who addressed the unprecedented conflicts faced by then- 
President-Elect Trump. Committee on Oversight and Government Reform Democrats, Press Release: Cummings to 
Host Forum with Bipartisan Ethics Experts on Trump's Conflicts of Interest (Dec. 13, 2016) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/news/press-releases/cummings-to-host-forum-with-bipartisan-ethics-experts- 
on-trump-s-conflicts-of-0). 


Allen Weisselberg Resigned from the Top of The Trump Organization. So Who’s Running the Company 
Now?, Washington Post (July 21, 2021) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/202 1/07/2 1/weisselberg- 
trump-organization-eric-donald-ivanka/). Donald Trump’s lawyer confirmed, from the beginning of his presidency, 
that his most profitable real estate holdings, including Trump Tower, Mar-a-Lago, and 40 Wall Street, were 
transferred into the Trust. Jt “Falls Short in Every Respect”: Ethics Experts Pan Trump’s Conflicts Plan, New 
York Times (Jan. 12, 2017) (online at www.nytimes.com/interactive/2017/01/12/us/politics/ethics-experts-trumps- 
conflicts-of-interest html). 


6! Certification of Trustee of the Donald J. Trump Revocable Trust, at 161 (Feb. 10, 2017) (online at 
www.gsa.gov/cdnstatic/Contracting Officer Letter March 23 2017 Redacted_Version.pdf). 


® Id.; See, e.g., Trust Records Show Trump Is Still Closely Tied to His Empire, New York Times (Feb. 3, 
2017) (online at www.nytimes.com/2017/02/03/us/politics/donald-trump-business html). 


% Trump Can Quietly Draw Money from Trust Whenever He Wants, New Documents Show, Washington 
Post (Apr. 3, 2017) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-can-quietly-draw-money-from-trust- 
whenever-he-wants-new-documents-show/2017/04/03/7f4c0002-187c-11e7-9887-1a5314b56a08_story.html). 


24 


Trump’s personal lawyer, Michael Cohen, for illegal campaign contributions.“ This information 
formed the core of Manhattan District Attorney Alvin Bragg’s April 2023 indictment of former 
President Donald Trump in the Supreme Court of New York State.® Also in 2019, Mr. Cohen 
testified before the Oversight Committee that Mr. Trump inflated the value of his assets in 
statements to banks and insurers in order to obtain more advantageous terms for loans and 
insurance coverage, and in addition, that Mr. Trump provided deflated valuations to lower real 
estate taxes on certain assets.© Mr. Cohen’s testimony led the New York State Attorney General 
to open an investigation of Mr. Trump and The Trump Organization that same year, and later 
bring the lawsuit in which Mr. Trump was found to have defrauded banks and insurers by 
providing these false valuations.®’ 


Claimed Donation of “Profits” by The Trump Organization to the U.S. Treasury Did 
Not Avoid Trump’s Myriad Violations of the Foreign Emoluments Clause 


Several months into President Trump’s term, The Trump Organization issued a pamphlet 
describing its “voluntary directive to donate all profits from foreign governments’ patronage at 
our hotels and similar businesses during President Trump’s presidential term to the U.S. 
Treasury.”°® This “policy,” however, clearly failed to comply with the Constitution, which 
imposes a total ban on the receipt of any revenue from foreign governments—not just 
“profits” —absent congressional approval. 


Because it was limited to “profits,” and did not extend to revenues generally, this policy 
was insufficient on its face to comply with the Foreign Emoluments Clause. The standard legal 


4 Committee on Oversight and Reform, Press Release: New Information Revealed in Oversight Hearing 
with Michael Cohen (Feb. 27, 2019) (online at https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/news/press-releases/new- 
information-revealed-in-oversight-hearing-with-michael-cohen); Committee on Oversight and Reform, Hearing 
with Michael Cohen, Former Attorney to President Donald Trump, 116th Cong, Transcript at 14, 21-22 (Feb. 27, 
2019) (online at www.congress.gov/116/chrg/CHRG- 11 6hhrg35230/CHRG- 11 6hhrg35230.pdf). 


65 The Porn Star, The Checks and The President: Trump’ Tawdry Path to Peril, Washington Post (Mar. 21, 
2023) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2023/03/2 1/trump-stormy-payments/); Manhattan District 
Attorney’s Office, Press Release: District Attorney Bragg Announces 34-Count Felony Indictment of Former 
President Donald J. Trump (Apt. 4, 2023) (online at https://manhattanda.org/district-attorney-bragg-announces-34- 
count-felony-indictment-of-former-president-donald-j-trump/). 


6 Committee on Oversight and Reform, Hearing with Michael Cohen, Former Attorney to President 
Donald Trump, 116th Cong, Transcript at 13, 19, 37-39, 160 (Feb. 27, 2019) (online at 
www.congress.gov/116/chrg/CHRG-1 1 6hhrg35230/CHRG-1 1 6hhrg35230.pdf). 


°7 Office of the New York State Attorney General, Press Release: Attorney General James Takes Action to 
Force Trump Organization to Comply with Ongoing Investigation Into Financial Dealings (Aug. 4, 202) (online at 
https://ag.ny.gov/press-release/2020/attorney-general-james-takes-action-force-trump-organization-comply- 
ongoing); Trump Committed Fraud by Inflating His Assets, Judge Rules, Forbes (Sept. 26, 2023) (online at 
www forbes.com/sites/alisondurkee/2023/09/26/trump-committed-fraud-by-inflating-his-assets-judge-rules). 


68 Letter from Ranking Member Elijah E. Cummings, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, to 
George A. Sorial, Executive Vice President and Chief Compliance Officer, Trump Organization (May 24, 2017) 
(online at https://oversightdemocrats house. gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/2017-05- 
24.EEC%20to%20Trump%20Organization.pdf); Trump Organization, Donation of Profits from Foreign 
Government Patronage (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/documents/Trump%200rg%20Pamp 
hlet%20on%20Foreign%20Profits.pdf). 


25 


dictionary definition of “emolument,” as well as rulings by federal courts that have addressed the 
issue, make clear than an emolument includes “any benefit, gain, or advantage.” As one of 
those courts observed, this definition “essentially cover[s] anything of value.””? By its own 
terms, The Trump Organization’s claimed donation of “profits” to Treasury, therefore, still 
allowed former President Trump to retain significant emoluments in the form of revenues, which 
its policy excluded from the funds designated for donation. 


Moreover, the policy substantially limited the scope of “profits” it covered to those (1) 
“generated from foreign governments’ patronage from wholly-owned Properties,” and (2) 
“generated from management fees earned from managed hotels and condominium-hotels 
attributed to foreign governments’ patronage.”’! By excluding non-wholly owned and non-hotel 
Trump properties, the policy omitted potentially significant sums from the already truncated 
category of emoluments that it covered. For example, this report identifies more than $1 million 
in foreign emoluments paid to Trump World Tower in New York which fall outside the scope of 
The Trump Organization’s policy. 


The policy further reserved the right of The Trump Organization to exclude from its 
calculation of profit “state-owned and state-controlled entities in industries such as aerospace and 
defense, banking, finance, healthcare, energy and others, which may not be reasonably 
identifiable as foreign government entities[.]””” 


Finally, the policy expressly stated that The Trump Organization would not even attempt 
to identify all emoluments, claiming that complying with this constitutional requirement would 
be “impractical” and that “a policy that requires all guests to identify themselves would impede 
upon personal privacy and diminish the guest experience of our brand.””? As such, under The 
Trump Organization’s policy, the only “profits” reported were those volunteered by foreign 
governments, and Trump-owned businesses never opened their books to allow review of their 
treatment of these payments. It is hard to imagine a more ludicrous and half-hearted approach to 
the categorical prohibition in the Constitution. 


The significant benefit to former President Trump from revenues generally—regardless 
of any profits—is demonstrated by the precarious financial condition of the Trump International 
Hotel in Washington, D.C., during his presidency. As Committee Democrats have previously 


® Congressional Research Service, The Emoluments Clauses of the U.S. Constitution, at 1 (Jan. 27, 2021) 
(emphasis added) (online at https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF 1 1086) (citing Blumenthal v. Trump, 
373 F. Supp.3d 191, 207 (D.D.C. 2019); Dist. of Columbia v. Trump, 315 F. Supp.3d 875,889 (D. Md. 2018);. 


7 Dist. of Columbia v. Trump, 315 F. Supp.3d 875,889 (D. Md. 2018). 


™ Letter from Ranking Member Elijah E. Cummings, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, to 
George A. Sorial, Executive Vice President and Chief Compliance Officer, Trump Organization (May 24, 2017) 
(online at https://oversightdemocrats house. gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/2017-05- 
24.EEC%20to%20Trump%20Organization.pdf); Trump Organization, Donation of Profits from Foreign 
Government Patronage (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/documents/Trump%200rg%20Pamp 
hlet%20on%20Foreign%20Profits.pdf). 


? Td. 
1d: 


26 


reported, a review of financial documents regarding the Trump International Hotel in 
Washington, D.C., provided by the General Services Administration (GSA) revealed that while 
President Trump claimed on required financial disclosures that he made $156 million in 
employment income from the hotel between 2016 and 2020, the hotel in fact lost more than $73 
million during this period.”* Reflecting the serious financial problems at the Trump International 
Hotel in Washington, D.C., annual financial statements obtained by the Committee also reveal 
that one of President Trump’s holding companies, DJT Holdings LLC, injected tens of millions 
of dollars into the Trump International Hotel as loans, the vast majority of which were never 
repaid and were later converted to capital contributions. The hotel’s significant losses were due 
in part to the hotel’s fixed costs, including general and administrative expenses, sales and 
marketing expenses, and property operations and maintenance.” Given that the hotel was 
operating at a significant loss, foreign government revenue would have helped to cover a portion 
of these fixed costs, even if alleged “profits” were donated. 


Under the Trump Administration, Federal Agencies Acquiesced to President Trump’s 
Receipt of Unconstitutional Foreign Emoluments 


In contravention of the Constitution’s explicit prohibition on a president’s receipt of 
foreign emoluments, federal agencies under the Trump Administration repeatedly acquiesced to 
former President Trump’s desire to continue profiting from his businesses while in office. One 
notable instance involved the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., which is located in 
the Old Post Office Pavilion—an historic building that has a lease overseen by the federal GSA. 
The contract for the lease included a provision specifying that “no ... elected official of the 
Government of the United States ... shall be admitted to any share or part of this Lease, or to any 
benefit that may arise there from.” Despite the clear language of this provision, the agency 
released a statement in March 2017 explaining that the agency had found that then-President 
Trump was in “full compliance” with the lease because his trust was a party to the lease rather 
than him personally.’’ Some within GSA, however, were concerned that this position violated 
the Foreign Emoluments Clause, the Domestic Emoluments Clause, and the plain terms of the 
lease prohibiting elected officials from being leaseholders.’* These concerns were merited, and 


™ Letter from Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Administrator 
Robin Carnahan, General Services Administration (Oct. 8, 2021) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/202 1-10- 
08.CBM%20GEC%20to%20Carnahan-GSA%20re%2001d%20Post%200ffice%20Building%20Lease.pdf). 


oa A 


7 Trump Leases His D.C. Hotel from a Government Agency He’ll Soon Be in Charge of, Washington Post 
(Nov. 15, 2016) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2016/1 1/15/trump-needs-to-give-up-his- 
trump-hotel-lease-right-now/). 


™ General Services Administration, Press Release: GSA Releases Statement on Old Post Office Lease 
(Mar. 23, 2017) (online at www.gsa.gov/about-us/newsroom/news-releases/gsa-releases-statement-on-old-post- 
office-03232017). 


78 General Services Administration, Office of the Inspector General, Evaluation of GSA’s Management and 
Administration of the Old Post Office Building Lease (italics in original) (JE19-002, Redacted) (Jan. 16, 2019) 
(online at www. gsaig.gov/sites/default/files/ipa-reports/JE19-002%2001IG%20EVALUATION%20REPORT- 
GSA%27s%20Management%20%26%20Administration%200f%200PO%20Building%20Lease_January%2016%2 
02019 _Redacted.pdf). 


27 


the GSA Inspector General later determined that “GSA’s decision-making process” regarding this 
matter “included serious shortcomings.” According to GSA’s Inspector General, GSA’s lawyers 
understood that President Trump’s continued interest in the Trump International Hotel “was a 
possible violation of the Foreign Emoluments Clause” but nevertheless simply decided to “punt” 
and “not to address the issue.” As the Inspector General’s report succinctly stated, “GSA Ignored 
the Constitution.” ” 


Similarly, in 2017, the Department of State approved leases by foreign governments at 
Trump World Tower in New York—thereby creating a situation in which an agency overseen by 
the president directly sanctioned unconstitutional emoluments flowing to the president.*° It is 
unclear to what extent the State Department considered the Constitution before approving these 
leases. It is clear, however, that the President accepted these emoluments without seeking 
Congress’s approval in violation of the prohibition set forth in the Constitution.®! 


The Ownership Structure of Trump Properties Discussed in this Report 


This report focuses on foreign spending and related conflicts in connection with three 
Trump properties for which Mazars produced records to the Committee: 


e The Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C.; 
° The Trump International Hotel in Las Vegas, Nevada; and 
The Trump World Tower at 845 United Nations Plaza in New York, New York. 


In addition, the report discusses foreign spending at the Trump Tower on Fifth Avenue in 
New York, New York, as reflected in publicly available information. 


As of 2020, the Donald J. Trump Revocable Trust owned, either directly or indirectly, a 
sprawling web of 558 corporate entities, which together comprised The Trump Organization. 
Given the number of corporate entities, the four properties discussed in this report constituted 
less than 1% of the businesses Donald Trump owned while he was President. The Committee 
did not receive from Mazars any documents regarding at least 80% of Donald Trump’s business 
entities. For many other entities, Mazars produced only a single document. Accordingly, the 
Mazars records and publicly available information shed light on only a small fraction of these 
companies, leaving unknown the purpose and financial activities of hundreds of opaque entities 
under Mr. Trump’s control.*? 


® Td. (italics in original) 


8° Exclusive: Foreign Government Leases at Trump World Tower Stir More Emoluments Concerns, Reuters 
(May 2, 2019) (online at www reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-emoluments-exclusive/exclusive-foreign- 
government-leases-at-trump-world-tower-stir-more-emoluments-concerns-idUSKCN1S80PP). 


8! Td. 


®2 Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 
278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed June 14, 2017) (online at https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/2 1154684/trump- 
oge-2017.pdf); Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 
278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed May 15, 2018) (online at https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/2 1154685/trump- 
oge-2018.pdf); Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 
278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed May 15, 2019) (online at https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/2 1154683/trump- 


28 


Based on former President Trump’s required disclosures with the Office of Government 
Ethics for the years 2017 through 2020, following the transfer of his assets to the Trust, the four 
properties discussed in this report were owned either solely by the Trust, or co-owned by the 
Trust with Mr. Trump’s children or a Trump business associate, through various entities wholly 
or partially owned by Mr. Trump.®* As the charts below demonstrate, Mr. Trump and his family 
members owned each of these properties through a complex web of limited liability corporations 
and other entities.*4 And as detailed in this report, through these intricate and opaque ownership 
structures, former President Trump received millions of dollars from foreign governments, 
foreign government-owned or -controlled entities, and individuals acting on behalf of them. 


oge-2019.pdf); Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 
278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed July 31, 2020) (online at 
https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/7012257/President-Donald-Trump-2020-financial-disclosure.pdf); Office 
of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 278e) (Donald J. 
Trump) (Filed Jan. 15, 2021) (online at 

https://extapps2.oge.gov/201/Presiden nsf/PAS+Index/6E78B 1 63F8 16EF6A85258663007529 1 D/$FILE/Trump,%20 
Donald%20J.%20202 1 Termination%20278.pdf); see also Decision and Order, People of the State of New York v. 
Donald J. Trump et al., Index No. 452564/2022 at 32 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. Sept. 26, 2023) (“Defendants do not dispute 
that DJT Holdings LLC and DJT Holdings Managing Member LLC are entities that sit at the top of the Trump 
Organization’s organizational chart and together own many of the Trump-affiliated entities that comprise the Trump 
Organization. DJT Holdings LLC owns 100% of the Trump Organization and DJT Holdings LLC owns 100% of the 
Trump Organization LLC.”) (online at www.documentcloud.org/documents/2399 1872-ny-ruling-on-trump-business- 
fraud); Trump, His Children, and 500+ Potential Conflicts of Interest, Wall Street Journal (Jan. 19, 2017) (online at 
www.wsj.com/graphics/donald-trump-potential-conflicts-of-interest/); What Trump's Disclosure of His 500 LLCs 
Can and Can t Tell Us, NBC News (May 16, 2018) (online at www nbcnews.com/business/taxes/what-trump-s- 
disclosure-his-500-llcs-can-can-t-n874391). 


83 [d.; Prepared from information contained in Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosure 
Reports filed by Donald J. Trump for the years 2017-2020. 


84 Source: Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE 
Form 278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed June 14, 2017) (online at 
https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/21154684/trump-oge-2017.pdf); Office of Government Ethics, Executive 
Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed May 15, 2018) (online 
at https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/2 1154685/trump-oge-2018.pdf); Office of Government Ethics, 
Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed May 15, 
2019) (online at https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/2 1154683/trump-oge-2019.pdf); Office of Government 
Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed July 
31, 2020) (online at https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/70 12257/President-Donald-Trump-2020-financial- 
disclosure.pdf); Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 
278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed Jan. 15, 2021) (online at 
https://extapps2.oge.gov/201/Presiden nsf/PAS+Index/6E78B 1 63F816EF6A852586630075291 D/$FILE/Trump,%2 
ODonald%20J.%20202 1 Termination%20278.pdf). 


29 


Trump International Hotel Washington D.C. 


eae a a ae a Ny oO ne eta ad ge 4 
Donald J. Trump Revocable Trust +) ' Trump Family Members 
T I | 
r Ivanka Trump ) re J. Trump J r.) Eric F. Trump Y 
Revocable Trust Revocable Trust Revocable Trust 
100% NX BH Ns A 
| | 
' ! ¥ ¥ 
: ; 75% Ivanka OPO LLC Don OPO LLC Eric OPO LLC (Eric 
DJT eee ee ante (Ivanka Trump) | (Donald Trump Jr.) Trump Jr.) 
fember 
i | 
7.5% - 
I 
\ | 
1 
15% | ! 
1% 175% Sag ee See SaaS Seer ses See ae 
99% 
Trump OPO Member Corp. 
Y 
aaa DJT Holdings LLC 
76.725% 
' 1% 
T OPO LLC 7.425% 7.425% 7.425% 
rump LLC 


(Trump International Hotel Washington D.C.) 


30 


Trump International Hotel Las Vegas 


Donald J. Trump Revocable Trust \ 


ee 


DJT Holdings Managing 
Member LLC 


100% 
1 1% > DJT Holdings LLC 


Trump Las Vegas Corp 


94% 
94% 
6% 
{ 6% 
‘ : eo : ; ” Trump Las Vegas Managing 
Hyde Park ee : Trump Las Vegas Member LLC Member LLC 
SS 
50% Trump Ruffin LLC a——1% 


100% 


Trump Ruffin Tower I LLC 


100% 


Trump Ruffin Commercial LLC 
(Trump International Hotel Las Vegas) 


31 


Trump World Tower, 845 United Nations Plaza 


Donald J. Trump Revocable Trust 


100% 


100% 


99.9% 


Trump 845 U.N. MGR Corp. 


Trump 845 U.N. GP LLC Trump 845 LP LLC 


845 U.N. Limited Partnership 
(Trump World Tower) 


a2 


Trump Tower Commercial Condominium Property, New York 


Donald J. Trump Revocable Trust 


100% 100% 


99% 


Tipperary Realty Corp 


Trump Tower Managing Trump Equitable Fifth Avenue 


1% 


Member Inc. Company 


99% 


Trump Tower Commercial LLC 
(Trump Tower Commerical Condominium 
Property, New York) 


The Committee’s Investigation 


Days after the 2016 presidential election, Representative Elijah E. Cummings, then- 
Ranking Member of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform (subsequently 
renamed the Committee on Oversight and Reform and then the Committee on Oversight and 
Accountability), expressed concerns that Mr. Trump’s business entanglements could threaten the 
accountability and transparency of the Executive Branch and threaten U.S. national security. 
Ranking Member Cummings wrote to then-Chairman Jason Chaffetz: 


to request that the Oversight Committee immediately begin conducting a review of 
President-elect Donald Trump’s financial arrangements to ensure that he does not have 
any actual or perceived conflicts of interest and that he and his advisors comply with all 
legal and regulatory ethical requirements when he assumes the presidency. ®° 


85 Letter From Ranking Member Elijah E. Cummings, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, 
to Chairman Jason Chaffetz, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/documents/2016-11- 
14.EEC%20to%20JC%20%28003%29.pdf). 


33 


The Committee on Oversight and Accountability is charged by the House of 
Representatives with legislative and oversight jurisdiction over the federal civil service, 
including the Office of Government Ethics, which oversees the compliance of officers and 
employees of the United States with federal ethics laws and rules.*° Further, “the Committee on 
Oversight and Accountability may at any time conduct investigations of any matter.”*®’ Pursuant 
to these authorities, the Committee has examined the adequacy of existing ethics and financial 
disclosure laws and agency implementation to inform Congress’s consideration of proposed 
ethics reforms, including reforms specifically applicable to the President. ** 


In April 2017, the Republican-led Committee sent a bipartisan letter to The Trump 
Organization requesting documents and information about its processes for identifying payments 
from foreign governments and entities they control. The letter noted that a “Trump Organization 
spokesperson on March 17 announced that the company has developed a policy to identify 
foreign government customers and donate profits” but expressed concern that “details of the plan 
to donate profits derived from foreign government payments, however, are still unclear.”*” The 
letter requested documents and a meeting with Trump Organization officials to determine how 
the President intended to comply with the Constitution’s prohibition on foreign emoluments. In 
response to its letter, the Committee received the approximately 40-sentence pamphlet discussed 
above that detailed The Trump Organization’s “voluntary directive to donate all profits from 
foreign governments’ patronage at our hotels and similar businesses during President Trump’s 
presidential term to the U.S. Treasury.””° 


In its letter enclosing the pamphlet, The Trump Organization stated that for several of the 
Committee’s specific document requests—including, among others, the Committee’s requests for 
documents regarding public reporting on donations to the U.S. Treasury made by The Trump 
Organization, whether donations would be claimed by The Trump Organization or by President 
Trump as tax deductions, and the specific entities within The Trump Organization that would be 
donating profits—“we believe it is premature to respond at this time insofar as final 


86 Rules of the House of Representatives, 118th Cong. (hereinafter “House Rules”) Rule X.1(n)(1); U.S. 
Office of Government Ethics, What We Do (online at www.oge.gov/web/oge nsf/about_what-we-do) (accessed Dec. 
18, 2023). 


87 House Rules at Rule X,4(c)(2). 


88 See, e.g., H.R. 1, For the People Act, 116th Cong. (2019); H.R. 745, Executive Branch Comprehensive 
Ethics Enforcement Act of 2019, 116th Cong. (2019); see also H.R. 5314, Protecting Our Democracy Act, 117th 
Cong. (2021). 


%° Letter from Chairman Jason Chaffetz and Ranking Member Elijah E. Cummings, Committee on 
Oversight and Government Reform, to Sheri A. Dillon, Partner, Morgan Lewis (Apr. 21, 2017) (online at 
https://oversight.house.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/2017-04-21-JEC-EEC-to-Dillon-Trump-Emoluments- 
Plan.pdf). 


” Trump Org Says Singling Out Profits from Foreign Guests Is “Impractical,” Politico (May 24, 2017) 
(online at www.politico.com/story/2017/05/24/trump-organization-foreign-guests-238771); Trump Organization, 
Donation of Profits from Foreign Government Patronage, Politico (May 24, 2017) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/documents/Trump%200rg%20Pamp 
hlet%20on%20Foreign%20Profits.pdf). 


34 


determinations regarding these matters are dependent on many factors that will not be known to 
TTO [The Trump Organization] until after the close of this year.””! 


On May 24, 2017, observing the inadequacy of this response, Ranking Member 
Cummings sent a letter directly to George Sorial, Executive Vice President and Chief 
Compliance Counsel for The Trump Organization, renewing the Committee’s request for 
documents. He explained: 


Complying with the United States Constitution is not an optional exercise, but a 
requirement for serving as our nation’s President. If President Trump believes that 
identifying all of the prohibited foreign emoluments he is currently receiving would be 
too challenging or would harm his business ventures, his options are to divest his 
ownership or submit a proposal to Congress to ask for our consent.” 


As the Committee’s investigations progressed and The Trump Organization failed to 
provide responsive documents, Mazars, the former President’s accounting firm, was identified as 
a possible custodian of documents possessing information relevant to foreign government 
spending at Trump properties, as well as information concerning misleading disclosures by the 
President and information about various items of concern involving the lease and management of 
Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C.”? On April 15, 2019, after a negotiation and 
consultation process, Chairman Cummings issued a subpoena to Mazars seeking several 
categories of documents, including all financial statements created by Mazars for President 
Trump and certain of his businesses for calendar years 2011 through 2018.4 


President Trump objected to the production of these records by Mazars, and in April 2019 
his personal attorneys sued in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia to block 
Mazars from producing responsive documents.”> The Trump Organization argued that the 


°! Letter from George A. Sorial, Executive Vice President and Chief Compliance Counsel, The Trump 
Organization, to Chairman Jason Chaffetz and Ranking Member Elijah E. Cummings, Committee on Oversight and 
Government Reform (May 11, 2017) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/documents/Trump%200rg%20to%2 
OOversight%20Committee%205-11-17_Redacted.pdf). 


» Letter from Ranking Member Elijah E. Cummings, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, to 
George A. Sorial, Executive Vice President and Chief Compliance Counsel, The Trump Organization (May 24, 
2017) (online at https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house. gov/files/documents/2017- 
05-24.EEC%20to%20Trump%20Organization.pdf). 


°3 See Memorandum from Chairman Carolyn B. Maloney, Committee on Oversight and Reform, to 
Members of the Committee, Update on Committee Subpoena to Mazars and Subsequent Litigation (Aug. 26, 2020) 
(online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/filess) MASTER%20Mazars%20Memo%2 
008.28.2020%20R3.pdf). 


°4 See Memorandum from Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, Committee on Oversight and Reform, to 
Members of the Committee, Notice of Intent to Issue Subpoena to Mazars USA LLP, (Apr. 12, 2019) (online at 
www.politico.com/f/?id=00000 | 6a-131 f-da8e-adfa-3b5f3 19d0001). 


°° Trump v. Committee on Oversight & Reform of the U.S. House of Representatives, 380 F. Supp.3d 75 
(D.D.C. 2019). The plaintiffs’ complaint originally named then-Chairman Cummings and the Committee’s then- 
Chief Investigative Counsel, and Mazars as defendants, but following discussions with the Committee, the plaintiffs 
consented to the Committee’s intervention as a defendant and agreed to dismiss Chairman Cummings and the Chief 


35 


Committee’s subpoena violated the separation of powers and lacked a valid legislative purpose. 
After the court declined to issue an injunction invalidating the Mazars subpoena, and the U.S. 
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit affirmed, the Supreme Court agreed to 
review the Court of Appeals’ ruling and granted a petition for a writ of certiorari.”° 


In July 2020—after 15 months of litigation—the Supreme Court issued a 7—2 decision 
upholding the Committee’s “broad and indispensable” power to conduct oversight of the 
Executive Branch and the President himself.”’ The Justices held that Congress’s legislative 
authority includes the power to issue a subpoena “directed at the President’s personal 
information” and affirmed that “[w]hen Congress seeks information ‘needed for intelligent 
legislative action,’ it ‘unquestionably’ remains ‘the duty of a// citizens to cooperate.’” The Court 
then held that courts must perform a “careful analysis” that takes account of the separation of 
powers among the branches of the federal government, including “both the significant legislative 
interests of Congress and the ‘unique position’ of the President.” The Court set forth four factors 
to guide the analysis for subpoenas issued to a sitting President and remanded to the lower courts 
to apply these factors to the subpoena issued by the Committee to Mazars.”® 


The matter returned to the District Court, which again upheld the Committee’s re-issued 
subpoena, but narrowed its reach to encompass only certain parties and certain years.””? The 
Court of Appeals, similarly, upheld the Committee’s subpoena under the newly minted Mazars 
standard but slightly narrowed its reach. !° 


On August 29, 2022, after the Committee’s successive court victories, The Trump 
Organization, the Committee, and Mazars reached a three-way agreement for Mazars to begin 
producing documents under the narrowed subpoena. The documents to be produced included: !°! 


e Accounting records, source documents, and engagement letters from 2014-2017 that 
reference, indicate, or discuss any undisclosed, false, or otherwise inaccurate information 
about President Trump’s or a Trump entity’s reported assets, liabilities, or income; 


Investigative Counsel from the action. See /d. at 88. 
°° Trump v. Mazars USA, LLP, 140 S. Ct. 660 (2019). 


7 Trump v. Mazars USA, LLP, 140 S. Ct. 2019 (2020). When the Supreme Court granted the petition, it 
consolidated the matter with Trump v. Deutsche Bank AG, 943 F.3d 627 (2d Cir. 2019), another case involving a 
congressional subpoena for the President’s financial records. 


°8 Mazars, 140 S. Ct. at 2035-36. The four factors to be applied are: (1) “whether the asserted legislative 
purpose warrants the significant step of involving the President and his papers,” including consideration of the 
availability of other sources that would reasonably provide the information sought; (2) whether the subpoena is “no 
broader than reasonably necessary to support Congress’s legislative objective”; (3) whether the subpoena “advances 
a valid legislative purpose”; and (4) assessment of “the burdens imposed on the President by a subpoena.” Jd. 


» Trump v. Mazars USA, LLP, 560 F. Supp.3d 47 (D.D.C. 2021). 
100 Trump v. Mazars USA, LLP, 39 F.4th 775 (D.C. Cir. 2022). 


10! See Stipulated Agreement, attached as Exhibit A to Order, Donald J. Trump, et al. v. Committee on 
Oversight and Reform of the U.S. House of Representatives, et al., Civil Action No. 1:19-cv-01136-APM (D.D.C. 
Sept. 11, 2022). 


36 


e Associated communications from 2014-2018 related to potential concerns that 
information in [President Trump’s financial disclosures] was incomplete, inaccurate, or 
otherwise unsatisfactory; 


e All requested documents from November 2016-2018 belonging to Trump Old Post 
Office LLC [the business entity created to operate the Trump International Hotel in 
Washington, D.C.]; 


e All documents from November 2016-2018 referencing, indicating, discussing, or 
otherwise relating to the Old Post Office lease; and 


e All documents from 2017-2018 related to financial relationships, transactions, or ties 
between President Trump or a Trump entity and any foreign state or foreign state agency, 
the United States, any federal agency, any state or any state agency, or an individual 
government official. 


Pursuant to this agreement, Mazars began producing documents to the Committee in 
September 2022, beginning with documents relating to the Old Post Office building in 
Washington, D.C., and The Trump Organization’s lease of that property, under which it operated 
the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C. 


Chairman Comer’s Termination of the Committee’s Subpoena 


As discussed above, in January 2023, almost immediately after Republicans took the 
majority in the House of Representatives, the Committee, apparently acting through Donald 
Trump’s personal attorneys, informed Mazars that it no longer needed to comply with its 
obligation to produce additional documents under the subpoena. On January 19, 2023, a lawyer 
for Donald Trump wrote to Mazars’s counsel: “I do not know the status of Mazars [sic] 
production, but my understanding is that the Committee has no interest in forcing Mazars to 
complete it and is willing to release it from further obligations under the settlement 
agreement.”!”? In communications with Mazars’s counsel, that attorney confirmed that the 
Acting General Counsel of the House of Representatives, in his capacity as counsel to the 
Committee, had so informed him.!°° 


102 Email from Patrick Strawbridge, Consovoy McCarthy PLLC, on behalf of Donald Trump, to Counsel 
for Mazars USA LLP, (Jan. 19, 2023); Letter from Ranking Member Jamie Raskin to Chairman James Comer, 
Committee on Oversight and Accountability (Mar. 12, 2023) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/FINAL%202023.03.12.%20JBR%2 
0to%20Comer%20re%20Mazars%20BofA%20Subpoena.pdf); Comer Stymies Probe into Trump Tax Records, 
House Democrats Say, Washington Post (Mar. 13, 2023) (online at 
www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2023/03/13/trump-tax-records-investigation/). 


103 Email from Patrick Strawbridge, Consovoy McCarthy PLLC, on behalf of Donald Trump, to Counsel 
for Mazars USA LLP, (Jan. 20, 2023). After receiving these communications, Minority staff repeatedly sought 
written confirmation from Mazars that Chairman Comer had agreed to release it from its obligations under the 
subpoena and court-supervised settlement agreement. See also Letter from Ranking Member Jamie Raskin to 
Chairman James Comer, Committee on Oversight and Accountability (Mar. 12, 2023) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/FINAL%202023.03.12.%20JBR%2 
0to%20Comer%20re%20Mazars%20BofA%20Subpoena.pdf); Comer Stymies Probe Into Trump Tax Records, 
House Democrats Say, Washington Post (Mar. 13, 2023) (online at 


37 


Chairman Comer effectively curtailed the Committee’s investigation just four months 
after Mazars had begun producing documents to the Committee. Although Committee 
Democrats had been, for years, trying to obtain former President Trump’s financial records from 
Mazars as part of one of the Committee’s most high-profile and heavily reported investigations, 
Chairman Comer claimed: “I honestly didn’t even know who or what Mazars was.”!™ 
Notwithstanding his termination of the investigation shortly after the Committee began to receive 


responsive documents from Mazars, Chairman Comer complained that Democrats had been 
9105 


COce 


investigating’ Trump for six years. 


Chairman Comer’s decision to release Mazars from its obligation to produce records 
pursuant to the Committee’s subpoena only weeks after Committee Democrats began working 
with counsel for Mazars to identify documents showing payments from foreign entities has 
severely limited the Committee’s access to highly material and relevant information.!°° Further, 
in working with Donald Trump’s attorneys to halt the production of documents only months after 
it started, Chairman Comer buried further evidence of former President Trump’s misconduct by 
depriving the Committee’s Democratic staff of the ability to work with Mazars to conduct further 
searches for responsive records, including any documents relating to Russia, South Korea, South 
Africa, and Brazil. 


In June 2023, the Committee—under Chairman Comer’s direction—and the parties to the 
litigation filed a joint motion for dismissal and termination of the case. The District Court 
granted the motion on July 5, 2023, ending the litigation and the Court’s supervision of the 
parties’ agreement.'°’ In the face of mounting evidence that foreign governments sought to 
influence the Trump Administration by playing to President Trump’s financial interests, 
Chairman Comer and President Trump’s representatives appear to have acted in coordination to 
bury evidence of his misconduct. !°° 


www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2023/03/13/trump-tax-records-investigation/). 


104 House Republicans Quietly Halt Inquiry into Trump’s Finances, New York Times (Mar. 13, 2023) 
(online at www.nytimes.com/2023/03/13/us/politics/house-trump-finances-investigation.html). 


108 Jd, 


106 For details on Chairman Comer’s efforts to obstruct inquiries into former President Trump’s conduct, 
see Letter from Ranking Member Jamie Raskin, Committee on Oversight and Accountability, to Chairman James 
Comer, Committee on Oversight and Accountability (Mar. 12, 2023) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/FINAL%202023.03.12.%20JBR%2 
0to%20Comer%20re%20Mazars%20BofA%20Subpoena.pdf). 


107 See Order, Trump v. Committee on Oversight and Accountability of the U.S. House of Representatives, 
et al., Civil Action No. 1:19-cv-01136-APM (D.D.C. July 5, 2023). 


108 Letter from Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Debra Steidel 
Wall, Acting Archivist of the United States, National Archives and Records Administration (Nov. 14, 2022) (online 
at https://oversightdemocrats house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house. gov/files/2022-1 1- 
14.CBM%20to%20Steidel%20Wall-NARA%20re%20Mazars%20Docs. pdf). 


38 


REPORT METHODOLOGY AND DOCUMENT LIMITATIONS 


Before Chairman Comer relieved Mazars of its obligation to produce relevant documents, 
the Committee received documents from Mazars showing substantial payments by foreign 
governments and entities to three Trump properties: 


e The Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C.; 
e The Trump International Hotel in Las Vegas, Nevada; and 
e The Trump World Tower at 845 United Nations Plaza in New York, New York. 


In addition, publicly available information shows significant spending by a state-owned 
Chinese bank at a fourth Trump property, Trump Tower on Fifth Avenue in New York, New 
York; however, Mazars did not produce any ledgers to the Committee for this property. 


As noted, the documents that were produced by Mazars are only a subset of the financial 
records the Committee subpoenaed from the company. Even this very limited set of documents, 
however, provides ample evidence that President Trump received millions of dollars from 
foreign governments and entities while he occupied the Oval Office, in blatant violation of the 
Foreign Emoluments Clause of the Constitution. 


Report Methodology 


This report is based on an analysis of emoluments from foreign governments and foreign 
entities identified in records provided by Mazars as well as public information. This report 
includes foreign spending at Trump properties that has been reported in the media only if such 
spending could be confirmed through Mazars records produced to the Committee or—as in the 
case of ICBC’s expenditures at Trump Tower in New York—through publicly available 
information. 


This report focuses only on payments that constitute emoluments within the meaning of 
the Foreign Emoluments Clause of the Constitution. It therefore includes charges incurred by 
foreign government departments, agencies, embassies, and royal family members, as well as 
their officials and employees—all of which are components of a “foreign State.” Consistent with 
the history and text of the Foreign Emoluments Clause, as well as opinions from the DOJ’s OLC, 
which provides legal advice to the President and executive branch agencies, this also includes 
payments by corporate entities that were owned by a foreign government. !” 


109 See, e.g,, NOAA Employee’s Receipt of the Goteborg Award for Sustainable Development, 34 Op. 
O.L.C. 210, 213 (2010) (online at www.justice.gov/d9/opinions/attachments/202 1/02/02/2010-10-06-noaa- 
goteberg.pdf); President’s Receipt of the Nobel Peace Prize, 33 Op. O.L.C. 370, 379-81 (2009) (online at 
www.justice.gov/d9/opinions/attachments/2020/12/22/2009-12-07-potus-nobel.pdf); Applicability of Emoluments 
Clause to Employment of Government Employees by Foreign Public Universities, 18 Op. O.L.C. 13, 16-19 (1994) 
(online at www.justice.gov/d9/olc/opinions/1994/03/3 1/op-olc-v018-p0013_0.pdf); Applicability of the Emoluments 
Clause to Non-Government Members of ACUS, 17 Op. O.L.C. 114, 122—23 (1993) (online at 
www.justice.gov/d9/olc/opinions/1993/10/31/op-olc-v017-p0114_0.pdf). OLC has determined that the Foreign 
Emoluments Clause applies to “instrumentalities” of foreign states, even if such entities or individuals are formally 
distinct from the foreign government or do not engage in “political, military, or diplomatic functions,” where the 
entity or individual is sufficiently influenced or controlled by the foreign government. Thus, “corporations owned 
or controlled by a foreign government” are presumed to be foreign states for purposes of the Clause. Nobel Peace 


39 


At every step, this report has taken a very conservative approach to tallying foreign 
spending reported in the Mazars records and public information. For example, in several cases— 
such as the stay at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., by the Embassy of the 
People’s Republic of China—the Mazars records show an advance deposit or partial payment to 
a Trump property but do not show the total amount ultimately paid for the event or stay. In these 
instances, this report reflects only the advance deposit or partial payment, even though these are 
almost certainly only a portion of the total payment for an event or stay. Further, out of an 
abundance of caution, this report does not include as foreign emolument spending expenditures 
by Chinese corporate entities whose ownership structures were opaque during the time frame 
under consideration and that therefore cannot be definitively identified as state-owned or state- 
controlled. The report excludes these entities’ payments from the emolument totals it presents 
despite indications that these entities were closely aligned with the government of the People’s 
Republic of China or appeared to have become state-owned. This report also excludes from total 
emolument spending more than $283,000 paid to the Trump International Hotel in Washington, 
D.C. for the “Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay,” an apparent reference to members of the 
Qatari royal family. In a letter to then-Chairwoman Maloney in 2022, the Qatari Ambassador 
asserted that “‘no representative of the Embassy of Qatar, and no other government official of the 
State of Qatar, was a guest at the Trump International Hotel” at the time.'!° Although the 
Ambassador’s assertion did not explain whether the stay involved members of the Qatari royal 
family, in keeping with the report’s conservative approach, the expenditures related to this stay 
were not counted as foreign emoluments. 


With respect to Trump World Tower, Mazars produced records only for the year 2018. 
Accordingly, the report identifies the monthly common charges paid by foreign governments and 
entities for units in Trump World Tower for the year 2018 as noted in the Mazars records. In 
addition, where public records confirm that a foreign government owned a property at Trump 
World Tower throughout the Trump presidency—and therefore incurred monthly common 
charges throughout this period—this report also includes an estimated total for the entire Trump 
presidency using the 2018 figures provided by Mazars. For example, Saudi Arabia owned the 
45th floor of Trump World Tower throughout the Trump presidency. Mazars records show that 
in 2018, it paid a monthly base charge of $11,189 for this property, totaling $134,270 for the 
whole of 2018. This report includes the $134,270 figure based on the Mazars records, as well as 
an estimated total emolument of $537,080—four times the 2018 total to account for the four 
years of the Trump presidency.''! Given that these common charges likely increased after 2018, 


Prize, 33 Op. O.L.C. at 379 n.6. 


‘10 T etter from Meshal Al-Thani, Ambassador of the State of Qatar, to Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, 
Committee on Oversight and Reform (Nov. 22, 2022) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house. gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/Embassy%20o0f%20the%20S tate%2 
Oof%20Qatar.22 1122. NARA%20Letter%20re%20Trump%200PO. pdf). 


"Il EXCLUSIVE: Donald Trump Made Millions from Saudi Arabia, but Trashes Hillary Clinton for Saudi 
Donations to Clinton Foundation, New York Daily News (Sept. 4, 2016) (online at 
www.nydailynews.com/news/politics/exclusive-donald-trump-made-millions-saudi-government-article-1.2777211); 
MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027371; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027416; 
MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027464; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-000275 12; 
MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027577; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027628; 
MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027675; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027721; 
MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027769; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027808; 


40 


the projections included in this report likely understate the emoluments received by Donald 
Trump’s businesses from the foreign governments that had properties in Trump World Tower. !!” 
In addition, the properties in Trump World Tower incurred special assessments, electric charges, 
and, in some cases, fees and interest arising from late payments. These assessments, charges, 
and fees are noted within the relevant sections, but are not included in the totals shown for the 
Trump World Tower properties. 


Finally, in certain instances, the report discusses charges incurred by actors such as 
lobbyists who, though not themselves components of foreign governments, were nonetheless 
acting in the interests of foreign governments. Although these payments do not constitute 
emoluments and are not included in tallies of emolument payments in this report, they are noted 
because they raise similar concerns regarding conflicts between former President Trump’s 
personal financial and business interests and his duty to conduct foreign policy solely in the 
interest of the United States. 


Extent and Limitations of Mazars Documents 


The Mazars documents summarized in this report provide only a modest window into the 
web of over 500 active business entities, foreign government expenditures, and resulting 
conflicts of interest and constitutional violations that pervaded the Trump presidency. The report 
is unable to provide a complete accounting of all foreign government emoluments former 
President Trump’s businesses received even during the time period covered by the Committee’s 
subpoena because (1) Chairman Comer, in coordination with Donald Trump’s attorneys, blocked 
the production of documents as soon as he became Chairman in 2023, as discussed above; and 
(2) Former President Trump and his entities failed to provide to Mazars—or Mazars failed to 
retain—many key documents. 


The set of documents that Mazars produced before Chairman Comer shut down the 
production also contained highly troubling omissions. For example, the Committee’s 
Democratic staff specifically requested that Mazars provide records related to a $20 million loan 
from Daewoo, a South Korean entity, that was not reported on former President Trump’s 2015, 
2016, or 2017 public financial disclosures. Spreadsheets prepared by Jeffrey McConney, The 
Trump Organization’s former controller, reflect that former President Trump’s “LOANS 
PAYABLE” included a loan for $19,760,000 owed to “L/P Daewoo” as of June 30, 2015.!!3 This 
loan remained outstanding until Daewoo was “bought out of its position on July 5, 2017.”!4 
Critically, as Forbes reported: “Although the debt appeared on The Trump Organization’s 
internal paperwork, it did not show up on Trump’s public financial disclosure reports, documents 
he was required to submit to federal officials while running for president and after taking 


MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027853; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027898. 


‘12 This report does not include any of the sometimes significant late fees paid by these governments in its 
calculations as they might not be replicable across years. 


‘13 Jeffrey McConney supporting data spreadsheet for Donald J. Trump, Statement of Financial Condition 
(June 30, 2015) (online at https://ag ny.gov/sites/default/files/complaint_ with exhibits part2.pdf). 


‘14 Jeffrey McConney supporting data spreadsheet for Donald J. Trump, Statement of Financial Condition 
(June 30, 2017) (online at https://ag ny.gov/sites/default/files/complaint_ with exhibits part2.pdf). 


41 


office.”!!> Yet Mazars informed the Committee’s Democratic staff it had no records to produce 
regarding the Daewoo loan. 


The Committee’s Democratic staff also requested hotel guest ledgers for the Trump 
International Hotel in Washington, D.C. covering the 2017 presidential inauguration and 
documents regarding Chinese mega-bank ICBC’s nearly two-million dollar a year lease in Trump 
Tower. Once again, Mazars represented it had no documents responsive to either of these 
requests. 


Mazars also did not provide any ledgers before the subpoena was terminated for 
properties which reportedly received a large number of foreign government visitors, including: 
Trump Turnberry Hotel and Resort in Scotland; Trump International Hotel and Tower in 
Chicago, Illinois; and Trump International Hotel in New York, New York. 


Mazars also indicated that it had no specific accounting of foreign government spending 
at Trump-owned properties. This is stunning in light of former President Trump’s pledge that 
Trump hotel properties would donate “all profits from foreign government payments” to the U.S. 
Treasury and the policy announced by The Trump Organization purportedly intended to 
effectuate that pledge. '!° 


The records provided by GSA also show the significant omissions in Mazars’s records 
regarding foreign government spending at Trump-owned properties, particularly the Trump 
International Hotel in Washington, D.C. Last Congress, based on records provided by GSA, 
former Committee Chairwoman Maloney estimated that total foreign government payments to 
just the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., from 2017 through 2019 would have 
been $3,787,485.'!’ This estimate was based on the hotel’s representations that, for these three 


"5 Trump Owed Hidden Debt While in Office, Forbes (Dec. 4, 2022) (online at 
www forbes.com/sites/danalexander/2022/12/04/trump-owed-hidden-debt-while-in-office/). 


6 Trump Vows to Donate Hotel Profits to U.S. Treasury, Government Executive (Jan. 11, 2017) (online at 
www.govexec.com/management/2017/01/trumps-vow-donate-hotel-profits-would-f/134509/); Letter from Ranking 
Member Elijah E. Cummings, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, to George A. Sorial, Executive 
Vice President and Chief Compliance Officer, Trump Organization (May 24, 2017) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/documents/2017-05- 
24.EEC%20to%20Trump%20Organization.pdf); Trump Organization, Donation of Profits from Foreign 
Government Patronage (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/documents/Trump%200rg%20Pamp 
hlet%20o0n%20Foreign%20Profits. pdf). 


"7 Letter from Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Administrator 
Robin Carnahan, General Services Administration (Oct. 8, 2021) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/202 1-10- 
08.CBM%20GEC%20to%20Carnahan-GSA%20re%2001d%20Post%200 ffice%20Building%20Lease.pdf). The 
Committee’s Democratic staff could only arrive at an estimate given the lack of sufficient information. Whereas the 
“donations” to the U.S. Treasury are reported by calendar year, the Mazars financial statements (including gross 
operating profit, gross revenue, and average daily rate figures) are reported on the basis of a year that runs from 
September | to August 31. Accordingly, the Committee’s Democratic staff estimated the Trump International 
Hotel’s total foreign government payments for 2017 through 2019 using the best information available to it. The 
Committee’s Democratic staff used the gross operating profit, gross revenue, and average daily rate from the 
unaudited supplemental schedule from the Mazars financial statements for years 2017-2019, as well as the amount 
of the “donation” to the U.S. Treasury reported in the Mazars financial statements for years 2018-2020 (because 


42 


years, it had identified $355,687 in foreign government profits (which it had remitted to DJT 
Holdings LLC, another Trump-owned entity; which DJT Holdings LLC had remitted to the 
Trump Corporation; and which the Trump Corporation in turn had “donated” to the U.S. 
Treasury on behalf of The Trump Organization).'!® However, only a fraction of this foreign 
government spending at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., is reflected in the 
documents provided by Mazars and discussed in this report. 


Ultimately, this report is based on the records the Committee was able to obtain from 
Mazars before Chairman Comer released the former President’s accounting firm of its 
obligations and on public information. Although these records clearly establish that former 
President Trump received millions of dollars from foreign governments and entities in violation 
of the Constitution’s Foreign Emoluments Clause, they are incomplete. Specifically, the records 
provided by Mazars include the following items for three of the former President’s properties: 


these financial statements reported the “donation” to the U.S. Treasury for the previous calendar year). See also 
Letter from George A. Sorial, Executive Vice President and Chief Compliance Officer, The Trump Organization, to 
Ranking Member Elijah E. Cummings, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform (Apr. 6, 2018) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/2018.04.06%20Trump%20Organizat 
ion.Response%20to%20EEC%20re%20Emoluments Redacted%20v.2.pdf) (“The Gross Operating Profit 
percentage was obtained by dividing the dollar amount of Gross Operating Profit for the property by the Total 
Operating Revenue for the property. The Gross Operating Profit percentage for the property was then multiplied by 
the foreign government patronage revenue at the property, resulting in the foreign government patronage gross 
operating profit for the property. The calculated foreign government patronage gross operating profit was the 
amount donated from that property to the Treasury Department.”’); Trump Old Post Office LLC Financial 
Statements (Aug. 31, 2017) (online at 

https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/Selected%20Documents%20Related 
%20to%20GSA%20Lease%20for%2001d%20Post%200 ffice%20Building%20Part%203.pdf#page=3); Trump Old 
Post Office LLC Financial Statements (Aug. 31, 2018) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/Selected%20Documents%20Related 
%20to%20GSA%20Lease%20for%2001d%20Post%200 ffice%20Building%20Part%203.pdf#page=19); Trump 
Old Post Office LLC Financial Statements (Aug. 31, 2019) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/Selected%20Documents%20Related 
%20to%20GSA%20Lease%20for%2001d%20Post%20office’20Building%20Part%203.pdf#page=36); Trump Old 
Post Office LLC Financial Statements (Aug. 31, 2020) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/Selected%20Documents%20Related 
%20to%20GSA%20Lease%20for%2001d%20Post%200ffice%20Building%20Part%203.pdf#page=53). 


"8 Letter from Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Administrator 
Robin Carnahan, General Services Administration (Oct. 8, 2021) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/202 1-10- 
08.CBM%20GEC%20to%20Carnahan-GSA%20re%2001d%20Post%200O ffice’20Building%20Lease.pdf). 


43 


Property 


Categories and Dates of Mazars Records 


Trump International Hotel, 
Washington, D.C. 


Hotel Ledger, which details customers, advance 
deposits, and account balances, among other information: 
e November—December 2016 
e August 2017 
e December 2017 


Posting Journal Reports, with individual pages 
identified as “Guest Ledger - Charges” (which identify 
customers by name, room number, and room rate): 

e September 2017—June 2018 

e August 2018 


Trump International Hotel, Las 
Vegas, Nevada 


Guest Ledger Detail, dated December 31, 2017, and 

covering bookings inclusive of that date (this ledger also 
includes several bookings that do not include the date of 
December 31, 2017, but that include dates close in time) 


Deposit Ledger, dated December 31, 2017, and 
including bookings from late December 2017 through 
mid-November 2018 


Trump World Tower, New 
York, New York 


Trump World Tower Condominium Status Report, 
which lists tenants, balances, amounts billed, and 
payments, among other information: 

e January 2018—December 2018 


Release and Redaction of Mazars Records 


With this report, the Committee’s Democratic staff is publicly releasing redacted versions 
of the underlying Mazars records on which the calculations of emolument spending set forth in 
the report are based. Remaining unredacted are the names of individuals identified as foreign 
officials at the ministerial level or above, and employees of foreign governments identified 


through public reporting. 


44 


PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA 


The Committee’s Democratic staff has documented more than $5.5 million in spending 
at Trump-owned properties during former President Trump’s time in office by the government of 
the People’s Republic of China (P.R.C.), as well as by the state-owned Industrial and 
Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) and Hainan Airlines Holding Company, a Chinese state- 
owned airline. Former President Trump violated the Constitution when the businesses he owned 
accepted these emoluments paid by the P.R.C. without the consent of Congress. Critically, these 
figures are based on the limited records from Mazars that are available to the Committee and on 
a public record maintained by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). As such, 
these emoluments represent the minimum amount of unconstitutional payments from the 
government of the P.R.C. and state-owned entities that Trump-owned businesses accepted during 
former President Trump’s term. 


This report also discusses former President Trump’s recent disclosures regarding a 
sprawling trademark portfolio that the government of the P.R.C. enlarged during President 
Trump’s term. Although Mr. Trump was required to complete a financial disclosure form each 
year that he was in office, he “neglected to include hundreds of trademarks he owns” on these 
forms during his presidency.'!? As Business Insider noted: “The belated disclosures mean that 
Americans had little insight into the scope of Trump’s foreign asset holdings during his 
presidency, and are only learning about them as he runs for a second term in the 2024 
election.”'”° Notably, if not surprisingly, the ability of Trump family businesses to secure 
trademarks in China improved markedly and rapidly after Trump entered office. '*! 


Finally, the documents provided by Mazars also record expenditures at Trump-owned 
properties by two Chinese companies that are closely aligned with the P.R.C.: Huawei; and 
Hongkong Huaxin Petroleum Unlimited, a subsidiary of CEFC China Energy (CEFC). While 
the government of the P.R.C. has been linked with both Huawei and CEFC, given the opacity and 
convoluted ownership and financing arrangements of these companies, this report does not 


"19 Trump Waited Until After He Left Office to Disclose Trademarks He Owns in China and Russia, 
Business Insider (Nov. 3, 2023) (online at www.businessinsider.com/trump-disclose-china-russia-foreign- 
trademarks-after-presidency-2023-10). Business Insider pointed out that the countries where former President 
Trump “owns trademarks includes China, Venezuela, Iran, Cuba, Belarus, and other countries heavily sanctioned by 
the United States.” Mr. Trump amended his 2023 disclosure to remove a trademark he had listed that was issued by 
Saudi Arabia. 


120 Id.; Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE 
Form 278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed Aug. 14, 2023) (Part 1 online at www.citizensforethics.org/wp- 
content/uploads/2023/08/Disclosure-Report-Part-1-8-14-23.pdf) (Part 2 online at www.citizensforethics.org/wp- 
content/uploads/2023/08/Disclosure-Report-Part-2-8- 14-23 pdf) (Part 3 online at www.citizensforethics.org/wp- 
content/uploads/2023/08/Disclosure-Report-Part-38- 14-23 pdf) (Part 4 www.citizensforethics.org/wp- 
content/uploads/2023/08/Disclosure-Report-Part-4-8- 14-23 pdf). 


'21 Donald Trump filed trademark applications in China beginning in 2006. From the time he announced 
his candidacy for the presidency in 2015 through 2019, roughly 200 trademark applications by Donald Trump and 
Ivanka Trump were pending in China. Center for American Progress, Trump’s Conflicts of Interest in China (June 
14, 2017) (online at www.americanprogress.org/article/trumps-conflicts-interest-china/); Trump Trademark 
Applications Spiked Around the World When He Started Running for President, CNBC (Dec. 4, 2019) (online at 
www.cnbc.com/2019/12/04/trump-accelerated-trademark-requests-while-running-for-president html). 


45 


classify their expenditures among the emoluments paid by the P.R.C. to Trump-owned 
businesses. However, the receipt by former President Trump’s businesses of expenditures from 
these entities while Mr. Trump was in office created conflicts of interest. 


People’s Republic of China’s Emolument Spending at Trump Properties 


Date Location Expenditure Amount 
August 27, 2017 Trump International Hotel | Embassy of China $19,391! 
(Washington, D.C.) Delegation 
November 4, Trump International Hotel “Hainan Airlines $195,662!” 
2016—January 1, (Las Vegas, NV) Holding Company Li” 
2018 
February 2017— Trump Tower Industrial and $1,948,180 !*4 
October 31, 2019 (New York, NY) Commercial Bank of (annual due 
China from 2012 
through October 
31, 2019) 
$5,357,495 
(February 2017 
through October 
31, 2019) 
EMOLUMENTS PAID BY P.R.C. $5,572,548 
(2017-2020) 


As a candidate, Donald Trump accused China of stealing U.S. jobs, orchestrating “the 
greatest theft in the history of the world,” and “raping” the United States with its trade policy. '?° 
In office, however, President Trump’s public rhetoric and engagement with the P.R.C. initially 
softened. While then-President Trump’s policies toward the P.R.C. were frequently inconsistent, 
they repeatedly deviated from the combative approach he articulated when he “made China- 
bashing a pillar of his 2016 campaign.”'*° According to John Bolton—who served as Mr. 
Trump’s National Security Advisor from April 2018 through September 2019—Mr. Trump 
“commingled the personal and the national not just on trade questions but across the whole field 
of national security.”!*” Axios also observed that “Trump-era China policy often featured two 


122 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00021348. 
23 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027206. 


'24 Securities and Exchange Commission, Free Writing Prospectus Structural and Collateral Term Sheet 
(Sept. 12, 2012) (online at www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/850779/0001539497 12000490/fwp.htm). 


25 Donald Trump Calls China’s Trade Practice the “Greatest Theft in the World,” ABC News (May 2, 
2016) (online at https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/donald-trump-calls-chinas-trade-practices-greatest- 
theft/story?id=3 8812125). 


26 Trump Promised to Bring China to Heel. He Didn’t and the Result is a Pitched Conflict Between the 
World’s Two Major Powers., Washington Post (Oct. 11, 2020) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump- 
china-xi-biden/2020/10/11/9c6e3 146-0270-1 leb-a2db-417cddf4816a_story html). 


27 John Bolton Book: Trump Asked China for Help with 2020 Election, Offered Personal Favors to 
46 


separate tracks: policies Trump personally led, and policies spearheaded by officials with China 
expertise.” !* 


From April through September 2017, then-President Trump engaged in meetings with the 
P.R.C.’s President, Xi Jinping, regarding bilateral trade and threats from North Korea. Despite 
the P.R.C.’s reluctance to pressure North Korea to halt its ballistic missile program and 
denuclearize, then-President Trump repeatedly lauded his relationship with President Xi. 


Shortly after taking office, then-President Trump hosted President Xi for two days of 
talks in April 2017 at his Florida residence in Mar-a-Lago, where he cited “tremendous progress” 
in the U.S.-China relationship and characterized his personal relationship with President Xi at the 
time as “outstanding.” '”? One commentator observed about this meeting that it seemed to be 
“built upon the assumption that personal chemistry would compel Xi to override his national 
interests.” '*° 


In an October 2017 television interview, then-President Trump remarked about his 
relationship with President Xi, stating, “we have a very good relationship and that’s a positive 
thing.”'?' President Trump’s remarks came shortly after President Xi’s opening speech at the 
start of his fifth term as President in which he expressed support for China moving “closer to the 
center stage” and expanding its economic dominance in contrast to Western values. '*? 


From November 8 to November 10, 2017—after the Chinese Embassy had spent at least 
$19,391 as an advance deposit for a stay beginning in late August 2017 at the Trump 
International Hotel in Washington, D.C.—then-President Trump traveled to China where he 
lavished praise on President Xi and, notably, defended Chinese trade practices in stark contrast to 
his previous public pronouncements blaming China’s policies for the U.S.-China trade 
imbalance.'*? Then-President Trump complimented President Xi, stating, “My feeling toward 


Dictators, CNBC (June 17, 2020) (online at www.cnbe.com/2020/06/17/john-bolton-book-trump-asked-china-for- 
help-with-2020-election html). 


128 Special Report: Trump’s U.S.-China Transformation, Axios (Jan. 19, 2021) (online at 
www.axios.com/2021/01/19/trump-china-policy-special-report). 


29 The White House, Remarks by President Trump After Meeting with President Xi of China (Apr. 7, 2017) 
(online at https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefings-statements/remarks-president-trump-meeting-president-xi- 
china/). 

0 Trump Promised to Bring China to Heel. He Didn’t and the Result is a Pitched Conflict Between the 


World’s Two Major Powers., Washington Post (Oct. 11, 2020) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump- 
china-xi-biden/2020/10/11/9c6e3 146-0270-1 1 eb-a2db-417cddf4816a_story html). 


131 President Trump: Some Call Xi Jinping the “King of China,” TIME (Oct. 26, 2017) (online at 
https://time.com/4998720/donald-trump-kind-china-xi-jinping/). 


132 Xi Jinping’s Marathon Speech: Five Takeaways, New York Times (Oct. 18, 2017) (online at 
www.nytimes.com/2017/10/18/world/asia/china-x1-jinping-party-congress.html). 


33 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00021348. The records provided to the Committee by Mazars 
do not indicate the dates or total length of the stay or whether the Chinese government expended more than the 
amount provided in the advance deposit. See Trump China Visit: U.S. Leader Strikes Warmer Tone with Xi 
Jinping, BBC (Nov. 9, 2017) (online at www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-41924228); In Beijing, Trump 
Declines to Hit President Xi Jinping on Trade: “I Don’t Blame China,” Washington Post (Nov. 9, 2017) (online at 


47 


you is an incredibly warm one.”!*4 Trump also stated that he did not “blame China” for the trade 
deficit between the two countries, declaring, “[a]fter all, who can blame a country for being able 
to take advantage of another country for the benefit of its citizens? I give China great credit.” !°° 


The next year, however, then-President Trump launched a trade war against China as part 
of a broad protectionist economic policy and trade strategy. According to commentators at 
Brookings, “Between July 2018 and August 2019, the United States announced plans to impose 
tariffs on more than $550 billion of Chinese products, and China retaliated by imposing tariffs on 
more than $185 billion worth of U.S. goods.”'*° The two countries reached a “Phase One” 
tentative deal to reduce trade tensions in January 2020.'°’ Ultimately, however, according to one 
analyst, “China actually bought none of the additional $200 billion of exports that it promised in 
the agreement.”!** According to a January 2021 report from the U.S.-China Business Council, a 
nonpartisan association of more than 270 American companies that do business with China, 
“Tariff rates remain[ed] at a multi-decade high despite both countries reaching a phase one trade 
agreement in early 2020.”'*? The report found that the trade war with China “reduced US 
economic growth and employment, resulting in an estimated peak loss of 245,000 jobs” and 
“failed to achieve major policy goals outlined by the Trump administration.” !*° And yet, amid 
what became a tense trade conflict, Mr. Trump inexplicably took positions favorable to specific 
Chinese interests as discussed below. 


Dismissing Concerns About Chinese Government Human Rights Abuses 


During his Administration, former President Trump repeatedly dismissed concerns about 
the human rights abuses perpetrated by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). During a June 
2019 phone call, then-President Trump reportedly promised President Xi that, while trade 


www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/1 1/08/in-beijing-trump-lavishes-praise-on-chinese-leader- 
touts-great-chemistry-between-them/). 


44 Trump Heaps Praise on “Very Special” Xi in China Visit, Reuters (Nov. 9, 2017) (online at 
www reuters.com/article/us-trump-asia-china-bromance/trump-heaps-praise-on-very-special-xi-in-china- 
visitidUSKBN1D91C8). 


85 Trump, Once Critical from Afar, Gives China a Pass in Trade War, NBC News (Nov. 8, 2018) (online 
at www.nbcnews.com/news/world/trump-says-he-doesn-t-blame-china-taking-advantage-u-n8 19221). 


'36 Ryan Hass and Abraham Denmark, More Pain Than Gain: How the US-China Trade War Hurt 
America, Brookings (Aug. 7, 2020) (online at www.brookings.edu/articles/more-pain-than-gain-how-the-us-china- 
trade-war-hurt-america/). 


137 Td. 


38 China Promised Trump a Better Deal for America; It Didn’t Actually Deliver, NPR (Feb.15, 2022) 
(online at www.npr.org/sections/money/2022/02/15/1079761270/china-promised-trump-a-better-deal-for-america- 
it-didnt-actually-deliver) (italics in original text). 


89 US-China Business Council, The US-China Economic Relationship a Crucial Partnership at a Critical 
Juncture (Jan. 2021) (online at www.uschina.org/sites/default/files/the_us-china_economic relationship - 
_a_crucial_ partnership at_a_critical_juncture.pdf); US-China Business Council, About the US-China Business 
Council (online at www.uschina.org/about) (accessed Nov. 8, 2023). 


'40 US-China Business Council, The US-China Economic Relationship a Crucial Partnership at a Critical 
Juncture (Jan. 2021) (online at www.uschina.org/sites/default/files/the us-china economic relationship - 
_a_crucial_partnership_at_a_critical_juncture.pdf). 


48 


negotiations continued, the United States would refrain from criticizing China over its brutal 
police crackdown against pro-democracy, pro-independence dissenters in Hong Kong.!*! Shortly 
thereafter, President Trump said he believed that President Xi had acted “very responsibly” with 
respect to the “riots” in Hong Kong—adopting the Chinese government’s dubious vernacular to 
describe the pro-democracy protests in that country. !4 


According to former National Security Advisor Bolton, in June 2019 at the G-20 Summit, 
President Trump told President Xi that Xi should move forward with building camps to detain 
Uyghur Muslims in Xinjiang, “which Trump thought was exactly the right thing to do.”!*? 


Emoluments Paid by the P.R.C. to Trump-Owned Businesses 


According to a document produced to the Committee by Mazars, an “Embassy of China 
Delegation” made an advance deposit of $19,391 to the Trump International Hotel in 
Washington, D.C., for an “Arrival” date of August 27, 2017.'** The advance deposit ledger does 
not specify an end date to the planned stay.'*° The advance deposits recorded in the Mazars 
documents produced to the Committee likely comprise only a fraction of the funds ultimately 
expended for a stay or event. Because Chairman Comer allowed Mazars to terminate its 
production of responsive documents, the Committee is unable to determine the total spending by 
the Embassy of China Delegation for this stay or the length of its duration. 


Chinese State Emolument Spending at Trump Properties: Hainan Airlines Holding 
Company 


Hainan Airlines (also referred to as Hainan Airlines Holding Company), China’s fourth- 
biggest carrier, is a widely recognized Chinese state-owned enterprise. '*° Hainan Airlines and its 


'41 Trump Promised Xi U.S. Silence on Hong Kong Democracy Protests as Trade Talks Stalled, CNN (Oct. 
4, 2019 (online at www.cnn.com/2019/10/04/politics/trump-xi-hong-kong-protests/index html). See also Council on 
Foreign Relations, Hong Kong’s Freedoms: What China Promised and How It’s Cracking Down (May 19, 2022) 
(online at www.cfr.org/backgrounder/hong-kong-freedoms-democracy-protests-china-crackdown#chapter-title-0-5). 


'2 Trump Says China’s Xi Has Acted Responsibly on Hong Kong Protests, Reuters (July 22, 2019) (online 
at www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trade-china/trump-says-chinas-x1-has-acted-responsibly-on-hong-kong-protests- 
idUSKCN1UH20Q/); Did the U.S. President Greenlight a Potential Chinese Crackdown in Hong Kong?, 
Washington Post (Aug. 6, 2019) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2019/08/06/did-us-president- 
greenlight-potential-chinese-crackdown-hong-kong/). 


'43 Bolton Book Bombshells: Trump Asked China’s Xi for Reelection Help and Told Him to Keep Building 
Concentration Camps, CNN (June 18, 2020) (online at www.cnn.com/2020/06/17/politics/bolton-book- 
trump/index html). 


44 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00021348. 


45 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008041. The Committee had not received a guest ledger 
for August 2017 for the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., before Chairman Comer released Mazars 
from producing documents responsive to the Committee’s subpoena. 


'46 International Civil Aviation Organization, List of Government-Owned and Privatized Airlines (online at 
www.icao.int/sustainability/SiteAssets/Pages/Eap ER Databases/FINAL_Airlines%20Privatization.pdf) (accessed 
Dec. 7, 2023); Hainan Airlines Says Govt Is Controlling Shareholder Now, But Change Possible, Reuters (May 17, 
2018) (online at www.reuters.com/article/china-hainan-airlines/update-2-hainan-airlines-says-govt-is-controlling- 
shareholder-now-but-change-possible-idUSL3N1SO3E4/). 


49 


affiliates, Grand China Air and HNA Group, are all enterprises controlled by the provincial 
government of Hainan through its investment arm, Hainan Development Holdings. !*’ 


In 2015, Chinese state-owned banks supplied Hainan Airlines’ affiliate HNA Group with 
billions of dollars in cheap loans and a $67.4 billion line of credit.'4* HNA Group employed 
these cheap loans to embark on a Chinese government-encouraged campaign of overseas 
investment in Western Europe and the United States. 


According to documents Mazars produced to the Committee, Hainan Airlines began what 
was apparently a 14-month stay at the Trump International Hotel in Las Vegas, Nevada, on 
November 4, 2016—four days before the 2016 Presidential election.'*? At the time, its affiliate 
HNA Group, faced increasing scrutiny from U.S. federal regulators due to the Group’s opaque 
ownership structure and ties to the Chinese state apparatus. !*° 


As it sought to expand its portfolio in the United States, HNA Group launched a lobbying 
campaign to improve its image in Washington, D.C., and secure U.S. government approval of its 
targeted acquisitions. After Mr. Trump won the 2016 election and began his term as President, 
and as HNA Group was patronizing the Trump International Hotel in Las Vegas, senior 
executives enjoyed access to high-level Trump Administration officials. In early June 2017, 
HNA Group executives met with then-Vice President Mike Pence at a public dinner in 
Washington, D.C. On June 19, 2017, HNA Group’s then-CEO and Vice Chairman met with 
then-Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, the head of the Committee on Foreign Investment in 
the United States (CFIUS), while several HNA Group acquisitions were undergoing review by 
CFIUS.'°' HNA Group executives reportedly met with additional Treasury officials with 


'47 Tq; Hainan Airlines Co., Ltd., 20/0 Annual Report (2010) (online at 
www hainanairlines.com/go/Annual_Report/en/2010AnnualReport_EN.pdf?v=2013.8-2); Hainan Airlines Co., Ltd., 
Financial Statements and Report of the Auditors for the Year Ended 31 December 2014 (2014) (online at 
www hainanairlines.com/go/Annual_Report/en/2014AnnualReport_EN.pdf?v=2013.8-2). See also Hainan Airlines, 
Hainan Airlines Co., Ltd., 2016 Annual Report, at Page 3 (2016) (online at 
www hnair.com/guanyuhaihang/tzzgx/cwbg/201905/P020190522481912759332.pdf) (language translates to: 
“Actual controller of the company/actual controller/Hainan Provincial State-owned Assets Supervision and 
Administration Commission refers to Hainan Provincial Government State-owned Assets Supervision and 
Administration Commission”); Hainan Airlines, Hainan Airlines Co., Ltd., 2017 Annual Report, at Page 4 (2017) 
(online at www.hnair.com/guanyuhaihang/tzzgx/cwbg/201905/P02019052248 1944475417.pdf) (language translates 
to: “The actual controller of the company/actual controller/Hainan Provincial State-owned Assets Supervision and 
Administration Commission refers to the Hainan Provincial Government State-owned Assets Supervision and 
Administration Commission”); Hainan Airlines, Hainan Airlines Co., Ltd., 2018 Annual Report, at Page 5 (2018) 
(online at www.hnair.com/guanyuhaihang/tzzgx/cwbg/201905/P02019052248 1912759332.pdf) (language translates 
to: “Actual controller of the company/actual Controller/Hainan Provincial State-owned Assets Supervision and 
Administration Commission” and “Refers to the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission 
of the Hainan Provincial Government.’’). 


148 Tq. 
49 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE-00027206. 


150 U.S. Is Expanding Power to Block Chinese Firms. HNA Was Already No Match, New Y ork Times 
(Aug. 2, 2018) (online at www nytimes.com/2018/08/02/business/hna-group-skybridge-scaramucci.html). 


'S! See also HNA Group, Press Release: HNA Group Joins the Atlantic Council, PR Newswire (June 7, 
2017) (online at www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/hna-group-joins-the-atlantic-council-300470430.html); 
Department of the Treasury, Secretary Mnuchin’s Calendar February 2017 — June 2017 (online at 


50 


authority over CFIUS later that month. !° 


These efforts, however, failed to address CFIUS’s concerns about HNA’s threat to 
national security, and consequently, several prospective deals fell through. HNA Group’s 
proposed acquisition of future Trump advisor Anthony Scaramucci’s investment firm, SkyBridge 
Capital, failed a review by CFIUS because HNA Group reportedly did not make sufficiently 
clear who owned the company during the regulatory review.'°? Further, in August 2018, citing 
national security concerns, CFIUS ordered HNA Group to sell its controlling stake in a New 
York City building just blocks from Trump Tower, in part because the HNA building housed a 
New York Police Department precinct with officers who protected Trump Tower and then- 
President Trump. !** 


On November 12, 2020—after the 2020 Presidential election but before President Trump 
left office—then-President Trump issued Executive Order 13959, Addressing the Threat from 
Securities Investments That Finance Communist Chinese Military Companies (CCMC), which 
prohibited investments by U.S. citizens in companies that benefit the CCP.'*° On January 14, 
202 1—just six days before President Trump left office—the State Department published a list of 
identified CCMCs, including Grand China Air, a major shareholder of Hainan Airlines alongside 
HNA Group.!°° 


By the end of then-President Trump’s term, HNA Group had been directly seized by the 
Hainan provincial government, which initiated a restructuring plan following a debt-financed 
$50 billion international spending spree.'°’ The Chinese government reportedly restructured 
HNA Group’s “debt and aligned investments with state goals, established state trusteeship, and 
transferred assets to state investors.” !°® 


Total Hainan Emoluments 


https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/236/Secretary-Mnuchin-Calendar-February-2017-June-2017-FINAL.pdf) 
(accessed Nov. 29, 2023). 


'52 U.§. Is Expanding Power to Block Chinese Firms. HNA Was Already No Match, New Y ork Times 
(Aug. 2, 2018) (online at www nytimes.com/2018/08/02/business/hna-group-skybridge-scaramucci.html). 


153 Td. 


'54 US. Orders Chinese Company to Sell Manhattan Building Near Trump Tower, Wall Street Journal 
(Aug. 10, 2018) (online at www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-orders-chinese-company-to-sell-manhattan-building-near- 
trump-tower- 1533917797). 


'SS Exec. Order No. 13959, 85 Fed. Reg. 73185 (Nov. 17, 2020). 


'56 Department of State, Communist Chinese Military Companies Listed Under E.O. 13959 Have More 
Than 1,100 Subsidiaries (Jan. 14, 2021) (online at https://2017-2021.state.gov/communist-chinese-military- 
companies-listed-under-e-o-13959-have-more-than- | 100-subsidiaries/). 


'57 Chinese Officials Are Taking Control of Troubled Airline Operator HNA, CNN (Mar. 2, 2020) (online at 
https://cnn.com/2020/03/02/business/hna-group-china-government/index html); HNA Restructuring Advances 
$5.7BN Airline Funding, Nikkei Asia (Sept. 28, 2021) (online at https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Markets/China- 
debt-crunch/HNA-restructuring-advances-with-5.7bn-airline-funding). 


'58 Congressional Research Service, Evergrande Group and China’s Debt Challenges (Oct. 21, 2021) 
(online at https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF 1 1953/2). 


51 


Between November 4, 2016—four days before the 2016 presidential election—and 
January 1, 2018, “Hainan Airlines Holding Company Li[mited]” (Hainan Airlines) incurred 
$195,662 in charges at the Trump International Hotel in Las Vegas for what appears to have been 
an astonishing 14-month stay. !°’ 


rRUMP TRUMP INTERNATIONAL HOTEL LAS VEGAS 12-31-17 
05:53 


NA Guest Ledger Detail 


Room No. Name Arr. Date Dep. Date Persons Room Charges Other Charges Balance Rate Payment Folio 
Method Status 


9290 Hainan Airlines Holding Company 11-04-16 01-01-18 195,662.04 180,730.19 14,931.85 
L 


The documents in the Committee’s possession record Hainan Airlines’ arrival date, 
departure date, and “other charges.” They do not specify the exact services rendered to Hainan 
Airlines (such as food service or other services typically provided to a hotel guest) over the 14- 
month period of the Hainan Airlines booking—or precisely when they were provided within this 
time frame. Mazars confirmed to the Committee’s Democratic staff that after performing a 
diligent search, it had no further documentation on Hainan Airlines or HNA Group in its records, 
suggesting that The Trump Organization may not have turned over all of the documents 
associated with these charges. In any event, the charges incurred by Hainan Airlines constitute 
the largest single expense, by a significant amount, reflected on either of the two ledgers 
produced to the Committee by Mazars regarding the Trump International Hotel in Las Vegas. 


Chinese State Emolument Spending at Trump Properties: ICBC 


ICBC is “one of China’s biggest state-owned commercial banks.”!® Prior to October 
2005, ICBC was “wholly-state-owned” by the P.R.C.'®! Following State Council approval on 
October 28, 2005, ICBC was “restructured and incorporated as a joint-stock limited 
company.”!© As of December 2023, the bank’s controlling shareholders are the P.R.C.’s 
Ministry of Finance and the Central Hujin Investment Company—an investment firm owned by 
China’s central bank.!™ 


59 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027206. The estimated payments made through Hainan 
Airlines’ stay at Trump International Hotel in Las Vegas are derived from the charge labeled “Other Charges,” 
which is the sum of two charges labeled “Credit” and “Balance.” HNA may have incurred additional charges 
outside of the limited period for which the Committee has records. 


6° Industrial & Commercial Bank of China Ltd.: Company Background, Nikkei Asia (online at 
https://asia.nikkei.com/Companies/Industrial-Commercial-Bank-of-China-Ltd) (accessed Dec. 7, 2023). 


6! Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, Annual Report 2016 (2016) (online at 
http://v.icbc.com.cn/userfiles/Resources/ICBCLTD/download/2017/7_20170421.pdf). 


dd: 


63 Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, F'4Qs (online at www. icbc- 
Itd.com/ICBCLtd/Investor%20Relations/IR%20Contacts%20and%20Services/FAQs/) (accessed Aug. 23, 2023); 
Congressional Research Service, China’s Sovereign Wealth Fund: Developments and Policy Implications 
[Archived] (Sept. 23, 2010) (online at https://crsreports.congress. gov/product/pdf/R/R4 1441/2). 


52 


While campaigning for the presidency in 2016, then-candidate Trump repeatedly boasted 
of his business dealings with ICBC, whose U.S. headquarters were located in Trump Tower in 
New York. For example, in his June 2015 campaign announcement speech at Trump Tower, he 
stated: “I love China! The biggest bank in the world is from China. You know where their 
United States headquarters is located? In this building, in Trump Tower.”!™ 


Similarly, in March 2016, when asked about China’s territorial claims in the South China 
Sea, Trump stated, “I do deals with them all the time. ... The largest bank in the world, 400 
million customers, is a tenant of mine in New York, in Manhattan.”'® According to Bloomberg 
News, ICBC was “one of Trump Tower’s largest office tenants,” with “space on three floors,” a 
“bank branch,” and “about 100 employees.” '® Bloomberg News also reported that, “[a]s of 
September 2012, ICBC paid $95.48 per square foot for its Trump Tower space, more than any 
other major office tenant in the tower.” !° 


As ICBC made significant payments to then-President Trump’s businesses in the first 
year of his presidency, the bank came under scrutiny for conducting financial transactions for 
front companies funneling money to the North Korean regime, including the country’s 
sanctioned nuclear program. In 2016, the DOJ alleged that ICBC, among other Chinese financial 
institutions, had provided bank accounts for a “Chinese company that allegedly conspired with a 
North Korean bank to evade U.S. sanctions.” !®* In mid-2017, in the face of widespread evidence 
that large Chinese banks had worked with North Korean front companies, the Trump 
Administration reportedly weighed sanctions against several major Chinese banks that had 
facilitated North Korean financial activity in the United States.'® 


‘64 Trump ’s Comments After Not Attacking Nike Raise Even More Questions, Washington Post (Sept. 5, 
2018) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/news/politics/wp/2018/09/05/trumps-explanation-for-not-attacking-nike- 
raises-even-more-questions/). 


‘65 When Chinese Bank’s Trump Lease Ends, Potential Conflict Begins, Bloomberg (Nov. 28, 2016) (online 
at www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2016-11-28/trump-s-chinese-bank-tenant-may-negotiate-lease-during-his- 
term). 


'66 China’s Biggest Bank to Reduce Its Space at Trump Tower, Bloomberg News (Jan. 9, 2019) (online at 
www.bnnbloomberg.ca/china-s-biggest-bank-to-reduce-its-space-at-trump-tower-1.1195744). 


167 Td. 


168 Trump Administration Weighed Sanctions Against Major Chinese Banks Tied to North Korea, 
Washington Post (Mar. 2, 2018) (online at www. washingtonpost.com/business/economy/trump-administration- 
considered-but-refrained-from-tougher-north-korea-sanctions/2018/03/02/7eafdc84-1c15-11e8-ae5a- 
16e60e4605f3_story.html). The DOJ brought a civil forfeiture action as to the proceeds in the relevant Chinese 
banks, including ICBC, but did not allege wrongdoing against those banks. See Department of Justice, Press 
Release: Four Chinese Nationals and China-Based Company Charged with Using Front Companies to Evade U.S. 
Sanctions Targeting North Korea’s Nuclear Weapons and Ballistic Missile Programs (Sept. 26, 2016) (online at 
www.justice.gov/opa/pr/four-chinese-nationals-and-china-based-company-charged-using-front-companies-evade- 
us); Complaint, United States v. All Funds in the Accounts of Blue Sea Business Co., Ltd., et al. (D.N.J. Sept. 26, 
2016) (online at www.justice.gov/d9/press- 
releases/attachments/2016/09/26/dhid_et_al_civil_forfeiture_complaint.pdf); Department of Justice, Press Release: 
Four Chinese Nationals and Chinese Company Indicted for Conspiracy to Defraud the United States and Evade 
Sanctions (July 23, 2019) (online at www.justice.gov/opa/pr/four-chinese-nationals-and-chinese-company-indicted- 
conspiracy-defraud-united-states-and). 


‘© U.S. Considered Blacklisting Two Chinese Banks Over North Korea Ties, Bloomberg (Apr. 13, 2018) 
53 


In September 2017, the House Foreign Affairs Committee’s Republican Chairman, 
Representative Edward R. Royce, released a statement calling on the Administration to “apply 
maximum financial and diplomatic pressure” to stop the North Korean nuclear program, 
including by “targeting more Chinese banks that do business with North Korea—with or without 
Beijing’s cooperation.”'’? Despite these pleas from members of his own party, then-President 
Trump and his Administration did not take any formal action against Trump Tower tenant 
ICBC."7! 


In the midst of the ongoing controversy, the bank’s lease at Trump Tower neared its 
expiration on October 31, 2019, and the bank was considering whether to exercise its optional 
renewal clause.'’” In an interview at a financial conference held earlier that month, Eric Trump 
explained that he could not simply “kick” out this controversial tenant if they decided to exercise 
their five-year option to renew. ! 


Eric Trump and The Trump Organization provided only vague statements regarding the 
ICBC tenancy. Eric Trump said that while ICBC had decided to keep “a couple of floors” in 
Trump Tower, it had agreed to lease a much larger New York office space in another building. '”* 
A Trump Organization spokesperson later offered that ICBC had “exited the vast majority of 
their space in Trump Tower,” in a transaction Forbes described as “somewhat murky.”!”° 
However, in a notable development, earlier this year, Forbes reported that ICBC “suddenly” 
departed Trump Tower shortly after former President Trump left office “in the first half of 2021 


(online at www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/20 1 8-04-13/china-banks-aiding-north-korea-are-said-too-big-to- 
punish). 


70 House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Press Release: Chairman Royce Statement on North Korea (Mar. 
9, 2017) (online at https://foreignaffairs house.gov/press-release/chairman-royce-statement-north-korea/). 


' Ranking U.S. Lawmaker Seeks Sanctions on 12 Chinese Banks Over N. Korea, Korea Herald (Sept. 13, 
2017) (online at www.koreaherald.com/view. php?ud=20170913000909); House Committee on Foreign Affairs, 
Press Release: Chairman Royce Statement on North Korea (Sept. 3, 2017) (online at 
https://foreignaffairs. house.gov/press-release/chairman-royce-statement-north-korea/#). See also U.S. Lawmakers 
Want “Supercharged” Response to N. Korea Nuclear Tests, Reuters (Sept. 15, 2017) (online at 
www reuters.com/article/northkorea-missiles-congress/u-s-lawmakers-want-supercharged-response-to-n-korea- 
nuclear-tests-idUSL2NILTOYD). 


' Managing Under Pressure: Eric Trump: Trump Organization EVP, Yahoo! Finance (Oct. 10, 2019) 
(online at https://finance.yahoo.com/video/managing-under-pressure-eric-trump- 164422827.html). 


'73 Td; During the same interview, Eric Trump made the false claim that the government stayed at Trump 
properties “for free” or “cost for house-keeping”—a statement directly contradicted by detailed information obtained 
by the Committee showing that, in some instances, Trump-owned businesses charged the Secret Service far in 
excess of the government rate. See Letter from Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, Committee on Oversight and 
Reform, to Director Kimberly Cheatle, United States Secret Service (Oct. 17, 2022) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/2022-10- 
17.CBM%20to%20Cheatle-USSS%20re%20Exorbitant%20Charges%20at%20Trump%20Properties.pdf). 


"4 Managing Under Pressure: Eric Trump: Trump Organization EVP, Yahoo! Finance (Oct. 10, 2019) 
(online at https://finance.yahoo.com/video/managing-under-pressure-eric-trump- 164422827.html). 


"5 Forbes Estimates China Paid Trump at Least $5.4 Million Since He Took Office, Via Mysterious Trump 
Tower Lease, Forbes (Oct. 23, 2020) (online at www forbes.com/sites/danalexander/2020/10/23/forbes-estimates- 
china-paid-trump-at-least-54-million-since-he-took-office-via-mysterious-trump-tower-lease/). 


54 


and less than two years after the bank exercised what Eric Trump .. . described as a five year 
extension.” !”° 


Total ICBC Emoluments Identified in Public Records 


ICBC signed a lease in Trump Tower for commercial office space in 2008 and became a 
long-term tenant of Trump Tower Commercial Condominium Property in New York. According 
to a debt prospectus filed with the SEC, ICBC entered into a lease with Trump Tower 
Commercial LLC and agreed to pay $1,948,180 in annual rent through October 31, 2019.'”” 
Based on this information and with the assumption of no variable adjustments, this report 
estimates that ICBC paid Trump Tower at least $5,357,495 between February 2017 and October 
31, 2019—the date at which the lease was set to expire per the debt prospectus. '”* 


Major Tenants 


Major Tenants 


Go America NRINRINR 5 667 % $ — % 2/26/2026 
Industnal and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC NRINRUNR 83% $s 66% 10/31/2019 


Mare Fisher NRANRINR 2% % s 2 % 10/31/2016 
Marcraft Apparel Group NRMRINR 7: % $7 $98 % 6/30/2015 


CONCACAF NRINRINR 7 56% $62 $851,446 29% 12/31/2015 
The Trump Corporation (and affiliates) NRINRINR Z. ne] $0.00 30 Various 
Total Major Tenants . : $23,751,675 

Non-Major Tenants . % $5,782,251 


Occupied Collateral % ae $29,533,926 


Vacant Space 


Collateral Total 


Counsel for Mazars informed the Committee that following a comprehensive search of its 
records, the firm identified no responsive documents in its database relating to the “Industrial 


6 China Paid Trump Millions in Rent. Then He Left the White House, Forbes (Apr. 10, 2023) (online at 
www forbes.com/sites/danalexander/2023/04/10/china-paid-trump-millions-in-rent-then-he-left-the-white-house/). 
ICBC continued to list 725 Fifth Avenue, 20th floor, New York, NY (i.e., the address of Trump Tower) as its 
business address on some public facing websites for its New York branch through at least December 2023. 
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, Welcome to ICBC New York Branch (online at 
www.icbkus.com/en/column/1438058343720960077 html) (accessed Dec. 8, 2023). Forbes reported in its April 
2023 article, “Forbes did manage to connect with someone answering the phones at ICBC’s branch in Queens. That 
person confirmed that ICBC no longer has any space in Trump Tower.” 


'1 Forbes Estimates China Paid Trump at Least $5.4 Million Since He Took Office, Via Mysterious Trump 
Tower Lease, Forbes (Oct. 23, 2020) (online at www forbes.com/sites/danalexander/2020/10/23/forbes-estimates- 
china-paid-trump-at-least-54-million-since-he-took-office-via-mysterious-trump-tower-lease/); Securities and 
Exchange Commission, Free Writing Prospectus: Structural and Collateral Term Sheet, Wells Fargo Commercial 
Mortgage Trust 2012-LC5 (Sept. 12, 2012) (online at 
www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/850779/000 1539497 12000490/fwp htm). 


8 This figure was calculated using base annual rent for space occupied by Industrial and Commercial 
Bank of China at the Trump Tower Commercial Condominium Property for a 33-month period, from February 1, 
2017, to October 31, 2019. Securities and Exchange Commission, Free Writing Prospectus Structural and 
Collateral Term Sheet (Sept. 12, 2012) (online at 
www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/850779/000 1539497 12000490/fwp htm). 


ne) 


and Commercial Bank of China” or “ICBC.” The absence of these records from Mazars’s files 
raises troubling concerns about The Trump Organization’s candor with its accounting firm.'” 


Apparent Quid Pro Quo: Trump Trademarks in China 


Trademarks are a significant component of the business model employed by Mr. Trump’s 
companies, which had registered hundreds of trademarks in more than 80 countries by the time 
Donald Trump entered office.'8’ Given that trademarks are granted and can be revoked by 
foreign governments, and because they have value, they are potential foreign emoluments 
themselves.'*’ As of 2023, Mr. Trump had 114 trademarks registered in China—more “than in 
any other country by far.”'®* By comparison, Trump businesses reportedly have 57 trademarks 
registered in the United States. !*° 


While public reporting makes clear that the Trump family’s businesses continued to 
expand their trademark portfolios in China during Trump’s time in office, any visibility into this 
significant aspect of his finances is sharply limited, because “[uJntil this year, the former US 
president’s ethics forms didn’t disclose his trademarks in foreign countries.” !*4 


For Mr. Trump’s businesses, trademarks serve multiple purposes and cover a range of 
products. New York Times reported in February 2017 that “[h]is trademarks in recent years have 
covered all manner of potential products” across the world, from alcohol to video games and 
gambling.'®> The Times added: “Sometimes Mr. Trump’s trademarks are markers for ventures 
that never materialized or construction projects underway where he is licensing his name. Other 
times they appear to be part of a defensive strategy to ward off trademark infringement.” !*° 


Former President Trump first disclosed his ownership of trademarks on ethics forms he 
filed as a presidential candidate in 2023, which covered his finances only from November 2021. 
Although Mr. Trump was required to complete this same financial disclosure form each year he 
was in office, he “neglected to include hundreds of trademarks he owns” on these forms during 
his presidency. Business Insider noted: “The belated disclosures mean that Americans had little 


179 State of New York Office of the Attorney General, Deposition of Donald Bender, at 69 (Apr. 18, 2023). 


180 From Trump the Nationalist, a Trail of Global Trademarks, New York Times (Feb. 21, 2017) (online at 
www nytimes.com/2017/02/2 1/business/donald-trump-trademarks-china html). 


'81 Trump Waited Until After He Left Office to Disclose Trademarks He Owns in China and Russia, 
Business Insider (Nov. 3, 2023) (online at www.businessinsider.com/trump-disclose-china-russia-foreign- 
trademarks-after-presidency-2023-10); Business Insider pointed out that the countries where former President 
Trump “owns trademarks includes China, Venezuela, Iran, Cuba, Belarus, and other countries heavily sanctioned by 
the United States.” Mr. Trump amended this disclosure, at which time he removed a trademark he had listed that 
was issued by Saudi Arabia. Id. 


182 Td. 
183 Td. 
184 Td. 


185 Td; From Trump the Nationalist, a Trail of Global Trademarks, New Y ork Times (Feb. 21, 2017) 
(online at www.nytimes.com/2017/02/2 1/business/donald-trump-trademarks-china.html). 


186 Td. 


56 


insight into the scope of Trump’s foreign asset holdings during his presidency, and are only 
learning about them as he runs for a second term in the 2024 election.” !*’ 


The ability of Trump family businesses to secure trademarks in China clearly improved 
markedly and rapidly when Trump entered office.'** For example, for a decade, Mr. Trump had 
been in a bureaucratic battle trying “to wrest the rights to his name back from a man named 
Dong Wei,” according to the Associated Press.'*? The Chinese government conspicuously 
awarded then-President Trump a trademark shortly after he assumed office, which the Associated 
Press described as a “surprise win for Trump” and reported, “may well be the first foreign 
trademark to be handed to Trump during his presidency.”!°? Moreover, it was granted mere days 
after then-President Trump agreed to honor China’s One-China policy—an arrangement under 
which the U.S. recognizes formal diplomatic relations with China but not Taiwan—during a call 
then-President Trump had with President Xi.!*! 

The expansion of Trump business interests in China also included former President 
Trump’s daughter and White House Advisor, Ivanka Trump. The Chinese government granted 
Ivanka Trump’s business “first trial” approval on one trademark on May 6, 2018, and registration 
approval for five additional trademarks the following day.'?? Within a week, on May 13, 2018, 
President Trump announced on Twitter that he had personally instructed the Commerce 
Department to reverse its decision to sanction ZTE, a Chinese telecommunications company. !?* 


'87 Trump Waited Until After He Left Office to Disclose Trademarks He Owns in China and Russia, 
Business Insider (Nov. 3, 2023) (online at www. businessinsider.com/trump-disclose-china-russia-foreign- 
trademarks-after-presidency-2023-10); Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial 
Disclosures (OGE Form 278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed Aug. 14, 2023) (Part 1 online at 
www.citizensforethics.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/Disclosure-Report-Part-1-8-14-23 pdf) (Part 2 online at 
www.citizensforethics.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/Disclosure-Report-Part-2-8-14-23 pdf) (Part 3 online at 
www.citizensforethics.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/Disclosure-Report-Part-38-14-23.pdf) (Part 4 online at 
www.citizensforethics.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/Disclosure-Report-Part-4-8-14-23.pdf). 


'88 Donald Trump filed trademark applications in China beginning in 2006. From the time he announced 
his candidacy for the presidency in 2015 through 2019, roughly 200 trademark applications by Donald Trump and 
Ivanka Trump were pending in China. Center for American Progress, Trump’s Conflicts of Interest in China (June 
14, 2017) (online at www.americanprogress.org/article/trumps-conflicts-interest-china/); Trump Trademark 
Applications Spiked Around the World When He Started Running for President, CNBC (Dec. 4, 2019) (online at 
www.cnbc.com/2019/12/04/trump-accelerated-trademark-requests-while-running-for-president html). 


'89 China Awards Trump Valuable New Trademark, Associated Press (Feb. 16, 2017) (online at 
https://apnews.com/article/5870a27432b54e92b9a8cb7734eb57d5). 


190 Id, 


'9! Td.; Trump Agrees to Support “One China” Policy in Xi Jinping Call, The Guardian (Feb. 10, 2017) 
(online at www.theguardian.com/world/2017/feb/10/donald-trump-agrees-support-one-china-policy-phone-call-xi- 
jinping). 

12 Tyanka Trump’s Business Wins Approval for More China Trademarks, Citizens for Responsibility and 
Ethics in Washington (June 27, 2018) (online at www.citizensforethics.org/reports-investigations/crew- 
investigations/ivanka-trumps-business-wins-approval-for-more-china-trademarks/). 


'93 Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump), X (formerly Twitter) (May 13, 2018) (online at 
https://x.com/realDonaldTrump/status/9956803 16458262533?s=20); Factbox: U.S. Bans Sales to Major Chinese 
Telco Equipment Vendor ZTE, Reuters (Apr. 17, 2018) (online at www reuters.com/article/usa-china-zte- 
idINKBN1HO12L/). 


57 


The following month, on June 7, 2018, Ivanka Trump Marks LLC received trademark 
registration approval for three additional trademarks in China.!”4 


In her official role, Ms. Trump met with world leaders as a representative of the United 
States abroad and alongside then-President Trump. Although Ms. Trump reportedly curtailed 
her day-to-day involvement in her company in January 2017, she did not divest from it, and the 
company continued applying for trademarks abroad to license the Ivanka Trump name. !?° 


Early in the Trump Administration, the Chinese government reportedly identified Ms. 
Trump and her husband, Jared Kushner, as a promising channel through which to thaw relations 
with the new president after his abrasive campaign rhetoric regarding China.!?° On March 28, 
2017, IT Operations LLC, one of Ivanka Trump’s holding companies, filed 14 applications for 
trademarks in China.'?’ One day later, Ivanka Trump formally joined the Trump Administration 
as an Advisor to the President. The next month, in April 2017, the Chinese government 
preliminarily granted three trademarks for Ivanka Trump Marks LLC, another holding company 
owned by Ivanka Trump, to expand her brand in China. Ms. Trump received the trademark 
approvals the same day that then-President Trump hosted Chinese President Xi in Mar-a-Lago, 
Florida, along with Ivanka Trump and Mr. Kushner, who was then a Senior Advisor to President 
Trump. !°8 


194 State Administration for Industry and Commerce of the People’s Republic of China, Trademark Details 
(Ivanka Trump Marks LLC) (online at www.citizensforethics.org/wp-content/uploads/legacy/2018/06/June-2018- 
trademarks.pdf) (accessed Dec. 8, 2023); Trump Strikes Deal to Save China’s ZTE as North Korea Meeting Looms, 
New York Times (June 7, 2018) (online at www.nytimes.com/2018/06/07/business/us-china-zte-deal html); Ivanka 
Trump ’s Business Wins Approval for More China Trademarks, Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington 
(June 27, 2018) (online at www.citizensforethics.org/reports-investigations/crew-investigations/ivanka-trumps- 
business-wins-approval-for-more-china-trademarks/). 


‘95 Ms. Trump formerly served as President, Treasurer, and Secretary of IT Operations before assuming a 
position in the Trump Administration in 2017. Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public 
Financial Disclosure Report (OGE Form 278e) (Ivanka Trump) (Filed June 12, 2017) (online at 
www.politico.com/f/?id=00000 16 1-87a8-d53a-a5f5-b7fce5f7f0001); Ivanka Trump, Shifting Plans, Will Become a 
Federal Employee, New York Times (Mar. 29, 2017) (online at www nytimes.com/2017/03/29/us/politics/ivanka- 
trump-federal-employee-white-house.html); Ivanka Trump’s Business Wins Approval for 16 New Chinese 
Trademarks Despite Shutting Down, Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington (Nov. 5, 2018) (online at 
www.citizensforethics.org/reports-investigations/crew-investigations/ivanka-trump-trademarks/). 


'96 China Woos Ivanka, Jared Kushner to Smooth Ties with Trump, Bloomberg (Feb. 7, 2017) (online at 
www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/20 17-02-07/china-courts-ivanka-jared-kushner-to-smooth-ties-with-trump). 


'97 Letter from Representative John Conyers, Jr. et al., Committee on the Judiciary, to Abigail Klem, 
President, IT Operations LLC, 115th Cong. (June 12, 2017) (online at https://democrats- 
judiciary house.gov/sites/democrats.judiciary.house.gov/files/documents/response%20letter%20to%20it%20operati 
ons%2011e%206.12.2017.pdf). Ms. Trump formerly served as President, Treasurer, and Secretary of IT Operations 
before assuming a position in the Trump Administration in 2017. Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch 
Personnel Public Financial Disclosure Report (OGE Form 278e) (Ivanka Trump) (Filed June 12, 2017) (online at 
www.politico.com/f/?id=00000161-87a8-d53a-a5f5-b7fc5f7f0001). 


'°8 China Defends Trademark Grants for Ivanka Trump Products, NPR (Apr. 19, 2017) (online at 
www npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/04/19/524765086/china-defends-trademark-grants-for-ivanka-trump- 
products). 


58 


In mid-2018, Ivanka Trump announced she would dissolve her fashion brand.'”? Despite 
this announcement, Ivanka Trump Marks LLC continued to retain trademarks in China. The 
Chinese government preliminarily granted “‘first-trial approval” for 16 trademarks for fashion 
items and other goods—including, notably, voting machines—to Ivanka Trump in 2018.7” 
Ivanka Trump continued to receive trademarks from the Chinese government through 2019, 
when Ivanka Trump Marks LLC received provisional approval for five trademarks that covered, 
for example, “child care centers [...] brokerage, charitable fundraising and art valuation 
services.”70! 


Public reporting indicated that by April 2019, the Chinese government had granted a total 
of 41 trademarks to companies associated with Ivanka Trump and that her companies had 
received trademark approvals roughly 40% faster after Donald Trump won the 2016 U.S. 
presidential election than had been the case prior to the election.?° 


Additional Spending at Trump-Owned Properties 


Chinese State Involvement in the Private Sector 


China’s President Xi has overseen a policy that enmeshes the CCP into the private 
economy, blurring the line between state-owned enterprises and private industry.*"> The Chinese 
economy mixes centralized control with market forces that President Xi has praised as “socialist 
market economic reform.”*™ Further, numerous laws nominally enacted for national security 
purposes have placed companies under tighter government control, including measures that 
require telecommunications companies to give “technical support and assistance” to the 
government, including the national security apparatus.*” In addition, in 2018, as several major 
Chinese companies faced towering debts and potential defaults, the Chinese government stepped 
in and took over these firms to prevent further damage to their domestic economy.” 


'°9 Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, /vanka Trump’s Business Wins Approval for 16 
New Chinese Trademarks Despite Shutting Down (Nov. 5, 2018) (online at www.citizensforethics.org/reports- 
investigations/crew-investigations/ivanka-trump-trademarks/). 


200 Td.; Ivanka Trump Receives 5 Trademarks from China Amid Trade Talks, CBS (Jan. 21, 2019) (online at 
www.cbsnews.com/news/ivanka-trump-receives-5-trademarks-from-china-amid-trade-talks/). 


20 Tyanka Trump Receives 5 Trademarks from China Amid Trade Talks, CBS (Jan. 21, 2019) (online at 
www.cbsnews.com/news/ivanka-trump-receives-5-trademarks-from-china-amid-trade-talks/). 


202 Tyanka’s Trademark Requests Were Fast-Tracked in China After Trump Was Elected, Forbes (Apr. 14, 
2022) (online at www.forbes.com/sites/tommybeer/2020/09/22/ivankas-trademark-requests-were-fast-tracked-in- 
china-after-trump-was-elected). 


203 Congressional Research Service, China’s Recent Trade Measures and Countermeasures: Issues for 
Congress (Dec. 10, 2021) (online at www.crs.gov/reports/pdf/R469 15/R46915.pdf). 


204 Ty Xi’s China, the Business of Business Is State-Controlled, New Y ork Times (Oct. 17, 2022) (online at 
www nytimes.com/2022/10/17/business/china-xi-jinping-business-economy html). 


205 | ibrary of Congress, China: New Regulation on Police Cybersecurity Supervision and Inspection 
Powers Issued (Nov. 13, 2018) (online at www.loc.gov/item/global-legal-monitor/20 18-1 1-13/china-new- 
regulation-on-police-cybersecurity-supervision-and-inspection-powers-issued). 

206 Anbang Takeover Puts China’s Companies on Notice, Reuters (Feb. 25, 2018) (online at 
www reuters.com/article/us-china-anbang-takeover-analysis/anbang-takeover-puts-chinas-companies-on-notice- 


59 


The documents provided to the Committee by Mazars record payments to Trump-owned 
businesses by corporate entities whose ownership structures are highly opaque but that have 
numerous ties to the government of the P.R.C. Given the opacity of these companies’ ownership 
structures and the uncertain nature of their specific ties to the government of the P.R.C.— 
including the CCP—this report does not classify expenditures at Trump-owned properties by 
these companies recorded in the documents Mazars produced to the Committee as emoluments. 
Nonetheless, spending by these entities at President Trump’s properties during his presidency 
raised potential conflicts of interest. 


Additional Spending at Trump Properties: Huawei 


The U.S. government has long expressed significant concerns about the national security 
risks posed by Huawei, a leading Chinese telecommunications equipment provider. More than a 
decade ago, a 2012 report by the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI), 
led by then-Chairman Republican Mike Rogers, determined that Huawei was a national security 
threat due to its attempts to obtain intelligence and other sensitive information through American 
companies. At the time, HPSCI obtained documents showing that Huawei furnished an “elite 
cyber-warfare unit within the People’s Liberation Army” with special network services.7°” 


In the spring of 2017, the Department of the Treasury and the Department of Commerce 
reportedly had investigations underway to examine whether Huawei had violated U.S. trade 
controls with respect to Cuba, Iran, Sudan, North Korea, and Syria.?°% 


While these investigations progressed, Congress included provisions in Section 1656 of 
the Fiscal Year 2018 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) prohibiting the U.S. 
Department of Defense (DOD) from using Huawei technology in any nuclear control or ballistic 
missile defense system absent a waiver.*”? President Trump signed the Fiscal Year 2018 NDAA 
on December 12, 2017.7'° The Mazars records reveal that just a week later, on December 19, 
2017, Huawei made a deposit to the Trump International Hotel in Las Vegas, Nevada, for a 
“Huawei Device USA Meeting” scheduled for January 2018 at the hotel.?!! 


idUSKCN1G909L). 


207 House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Investigative Report on the U.S. National Security 
Issues Posed by Chinese Telecommunications Companies Huawei and ZTE (Oct. 8, 2012) (online at 
https://intelligence.house. gov/sites/intelligence house.gov/files/documents/huawei- 
zte%20investigative%20report%20(final).pdf). 


208 Huawei, Chinese Technology Giant, Is Focus of Widening U.S. Investigation, New York Times (Apr. 
26, 2017) (online at www.nytimes.com/2017/04/26/business/huawei-investigation-sanctions-subpoena.html). 


209 Pub. L. No. 115-91, § 1656 (2017); Congressional Research Service, U.S. Restrictions on Huawei 
Technologies: National Security, Foreign Policy, and Economic Interests (Jan 5. 2022) (online at 
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R47012/2). 


710 Tq. ; Department of Defense, Press Release: Trump Signs Fiscal Year 2018 Defense Authorization (Dec. 
12, 2017) (online at www.defense.gov/News/News-Stories/Article/Article/1394990/trump-signs-fiscal-year-2018- 
defense-authorization/). 


211 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEEE-00027218. 


60 


While a Trump-owned hotel was doing business with Huawei, others in the federal 
government continued to sound the alarm about the Chinese company. On February 13, 2018, 
six U.S. intelligence chiefs testified before Congress that American consumers should not buy 
Huawei devices and services.”!” 


In August 2018, Congress enacted the Fiscal Year 2019 NDAA, which restricted the 
entire U.S. government from doing business with Huawei or entities that used Huawei 
equipment.?!° 


Also in August 2018, the DOJ filed a sealed indictment alleging that Huawei undertook a 
multi-year criminal scheme to violate U.S. sanctions on Iran by operating “an unofficial 
subsidiary to obtain otherwise prohibited U.S.-origin goods, technology and services” for its 
Iran-based business.”!* According to the DOJ, when Huawei and Huawei USA “became aware 
of the U.S. government’s criminal investigation” in 2017, the company “made efforts to move 
witnesses with knowledge” of the scheme to China “and to destroy and conceal evidence in the 
United States.”?!> In January 2019, when announcing the indictments against Huawei and other 
defendants publicly, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Christopher Wray, 
warned that Huawei poses “a dual threat to both our economic and national security.”?!® On 
October 24, 2022, the DOJ announced that it had charged two intelligence officers of the P.R.C. 
for attempting to obstruct a criminal prosecution in the Eastern District of New York against a 
Chinese telecommunications firm which, according to public reporting, was Huawei.*"’ 


712 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Open Hearing on Worldwide Threats, 115th Congress, (Feb. 
13, 2018) (online at www.intelligence.senate. gov/hearings/open-hearing-worldwide-threats-0#); Six Top US 
Intelligence Chiefs Caution Against Buying Huawei Phones, CNBC (Feb. 13, 2018) (online at 
www.cnbc.com/2018/02/13/chinas-hauwei-top-us-intelligence-chiefs-caution-americans-away.html). 


713 Pub. L. No. 115-232, § 889 (2018). 


214 See Superseding Indictment, Doc. 126 (Feb. 13, 2020), United States of America v. Huawei Technologies 
Co., LTD., Huawei Device Co., Ltd., Huawei Device USA Inc., Futurewei Technologies, Inc., Skycom Tech Co. Ltd., 
Wanzhou Meng, E.D.N.Y (No. 1-18-cr-00457-AMD-CLP) (online at www.justice.gov/opa/press- 
release/file/1248961/download). Huawei Chief Financial Officer Wanzhou Meng entered into a deferred 
prosecution agreement (DPA) with federal prosecutors and pursuant to the DPA, took “responsibility for her 
principal role in perpetrating a scheme to defraud a global financial institution.” Department of Justice, Press 
Release: Huawei CFO Meng Wanzhou Admits to Misleading Global Financial Institution (Sept. 24, 2021) (online at 
www. justice. gov/opa/pr/huawei-cfo-wanzhou-meng-admits-misleading-global-financial-institution). 


215 See id. 


216 Department of Justice, Press Release: Chinese Telecommunications Conglomerate Huawei and Huawei 
CFO Wanzhou Meng Charged with Financial Fraud (Jan. 28, 2019) (online at www.justice.gov/opa/pr/chinese- 
telecommunications-conglomerate-huawei-and-huawei-cfo-wanzhou-meng-charged-financial). 


217 Department of Justice, Press Release: Two Arrested and 13 Charged in Three Separate Cases for 
Alleged Participation in Malign Schemes in the United States on Behalf of the Government of the People’s Republic 
of China (Oct. 24, 2022) (online at www.justice.gov/opa/pr/two-arrested-and- 13-charged-three-separate-cases- 
alleged-participation-malign-schemes-united). See also U.S. Charges Two Chinese Nationals with Obstructing 
Huawei Case, Source Says, Reuters (Oct. 24, 2022) (online at https://reuters.com/legal/us-charges-two-chinese- 
defendants-with-trying-obstruct-telecom-prosecution-2022-10-24/). 


61 


While both Congress and officials inside the Trump Administration sought to take a hard 
line on Chinese companies operating in a manner contrary to U.S. national security, then- 
President Trump repeatedly contradicted administration officials in an apparent effort to blunt the 
restrictions the U.S. government was placing on Huawei.*'® His seeming pushback provoked 
bipartisan backlash across Congress. 


In May 2019, the Commerce Department placed Huawei on its Entity List—commonly 
known as the Commerce “blacklist”—which prevented the firm from buying American products 
without U.S. government approval.?!? However, a little over a month after Huawei was placed 
on the Entity List, then-President Trump declared that after consultation with President Xi, he 
would lift the blacklist of Huawei, stating on Twitter: 


At the request of our High Tech companies, and President Xi, I agreed to allow Chinese 
company Huawei to buy product from them which will not impact our National Security. 
Importantly, we have opened up negotiations ... again with China as our relationship with 
them continues to be a very good one.?”° 


Forbes reported that “Trump told reporters that ‘U.S. companies can sell their equipment 
to Huawei,’ as long as its [sic] ‘equipment where there’s no great national security problem.’ He 
suggested this was a ‘personal favor’ to Xi.”77! 


Lawmakers from both parties strongly condemned former President Trump’s reversal. 
For example, Senator Marco Rubio (R-FL) tweeted: 

If President Trump has agreed to reverse recent sanctions against #Huawei he has made a 

catastrophic mistake. It will destroy the credibility of his administrations warnings about 

the threat posed by the company, no one will ever again take them seriously [sic].?”” 


The reversal was, however, greeted with enthusiasm by Huawei on its Twitter account, 
which posted a link to the story and issued the following tweet:*”° 


218 Trump’s Offer of U.S. Tech Lifeline for Huawei Prompts Fierce Political Backlash, Forbes (June 29, 
2019) (online at www.forbes.com/sites/zakdoffman/20 19/06/29/trumps-offer-of-u-s-tech-lifeline-for-huawei- 
prompts-fierce-political-backlash/). 


>19 Bureau of Industry and Security, Addition of Entities to the Entity List, 84 Fed. Reg. 22961 (May 21, 
2019) (final rule). 


220 Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump), X (formerly Twitter) (June 29, 2019) (online at 
https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/1 145097779632627712). See also White House Will Reportedly Wait on 
Granting Huawei Licenses as the Trade War Ramps Back Up, CNN Business (Aug 9, 2019) (online at 
www.cnn.com/2019/08/08/tech/huawei-licenses/index html). 


21 Trump’s Offer of U.S. Tech Lifeline for Huawei Prompts Fierce Political Backlash, Forbes (June 29, 
2019) (online at www.forbes.com/sites/zakdoffman/20 19/06/29/trumps-offer-of-u-s-tech-lifeline-for-huawei- 
prompts-fierce-political-backlash/). 


222 Marco Rubio (@marcorubio), X (formerly Twitter) (June 29, 2019) (online at 
https://twitter.com/marcorubio/status/1 144977483 101593601). 


23 Huawei Facts (@HuaweiFacts), X (formerly Twitter) (June 29, 2019) (online at 
https://twitter.com/HuaweiFacts/status/114488262080468992 17). 


62 


Huawei Facts @ 
Following v 
nuawer @HuaweiFacts 


U-turn? Donald Trump suggests he would 
allow #Huawei to once again purchase U.S. 
technology! #HuaweiFacts 


While Huawei ultimately remained on the blacklist, then-President Trump’s 
Administration granted Huawei six temporary general licenses, generally known as “reprieve[s], 
between May 2019 and August 2020, allowing American companies to continue doing business 
with Huawei.”4 In November 2019, the Department of Commerce announced that it would not 
only extend Huawei’s temporary general license, but would approve “additional, more 
permanent licenses” that would allow Huawei to fully resume its engagement with certain U.S. 
firms.””° 


39 


In November 2019, a bipartisan group of 15 Senators—including Chuck Schumer, Tom 
Cotton, Josh Hawley, Elizabeth Warren, and Rick Scott—wrote to President Trump expressing 
their strong disapproval of the decision to grant Huawei reprieves and requesting he suspend the 
granting of licenses until he provided Congress with more information on the effect of this action 
on national security.””° The Trump Administration extended an additional three reprieves to 
Huawei despite receiving this bipartisan letter. The Department of Commerce did not fully 
implement the ban on Huawei until August 13, 2020—15 months after it was scheduled to go 
into effect.??’ 

On June 12, 2020, the DOD published its inaugural list of entities “owned or controlled” 
by the Chinese military, which included Huawei.””® Later in June 2020, the Federal 


224 The Department of Commerce issued the initial Temporary General License on May 22, 2019. The 
Temporary General License’s validity was extended on August 21, 2019, November 18, 2019, February 18, 2020, 
March 18, 2020, and May 18, 2020. Department of Commerce, Huawei Temporary General License Extension 
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) (May 18, 2020) (online at https://bis.doc.gov/index.php/documents/pdfs/2446- 
huawei-entity-list-temporary-general-license-extension-faqs/file); Congressional Research Service, U.S. Restrictions 
on Huawei Technologies: National Security, Foreign Policy, and Economic Interests (Jan 5. 2022) (online at 
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R47012/2). 


25 Letter from Senator Chuck Schumer, Senator Tom Cotton, et al., to President Donald J. Trump (Nov. 
19, 2019) (online at www.democrats.senate. gov/ptsschhw?download). 


226 Td. 


227 Congressional Research Service, U.S. Restrictions on Huawei Technologies: National Security, Foreign 
Policy, and Economic Interests (Jan. 5, 2022) (online at https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R47012/2). 


228 Under federal law, the Department of Defense is required to track firms “owned or controlled” by 
China’s People’s Liberation Army that are active in the United States. Pub. L. No. 105-261 (1998); Department of 
Defense, Qualifying Entities Prepared in Response to Section 1237 of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 1999 (PUBLIC LAW 105-261) (June 12, 2020) (online at 
https://media.defense.gov/2020/Aug/28/2002486659/-1/- 
1/1/LINK_2_1237_TRANCHE_1 QUALIFIYING_ENTITIES.PDF); Exclusive: Trump Administration Says 
Huawei, Hikvision Backed by Chinese Military, Reuters (June 23, 2020) (online at www reuters.com/article/us-usa- 
china-military-exclusive/exclusive-trump-administration-says-huawei-hikvision-backed-by-chinese-military- 
document-idUSKBN23V309/); Huawei on List of 20 Chinese Companies That Pentagon Says Are Controlled by 


63 


Communications Commission designated Huawei—as well as Chinese telecommunications firm 
ZTE—as threats to U.S. national security.””” 


Huawei’s Expenditure at Trump-Owned Property 


According to ledgers that Mazars produced to the Committee, Chinese 
telecommunications giant Huawei made a $5,377 advance deposit at the Trump International 
Hotel in Las Vegas on December 19, 2017, for an event labeled “Huawei Device USA Meeting” 
scheduled to be held from January 11 to January 15, 2018.72° Huawei may have made additional 
payments beyond this advance deposit, but the limited records provided by Mazars do not 
provide any more information on this event.”*! In this instance as in so many others, Chairman 
Comer’s release of Mazars from its obligations to produce records under the Committee’s 
subpoena has prevented the Committee from determining with certainty the full amount of the 
payments made by Huawei to Trump-owned businesses. 


Additional Spending at Trump Properties: CEFC China Energy Subsidiary 


At its height, CEFC was one of the largest companies in China: an oil, coal, and financial 
conglomerate with an estimated $40 billion in revenue and 50,000 employees.77? CEFC 
financed energy projects across the globe and owned considerable property assets, including a 
condominium unit at Trump World Tower. 

CEFC is the same entity that Hunter Biden did business with during the Trump 
presidency, including entering into an August 2017 consulting agreement in connection with the 
joint pursuit of investments, as well as a September 2017 agreement for Mr. Biden to provide 
legal representation to a CEFC official under federal investigation in the U.S.7*° 


In March 2018, as CEFC’s financial situation appeared to deteriorate, state media in the 
P.R.C. reported that state-owned investment firm Shanghai Guosheng Group had taken over 
CEFC.**4 In the absence of independent reporting on this event, this report has not classified 


People’s Liberation Army, TIME (June 25, 2020) (online at https://time.com/5859 1 19/huawei-chinese-military- 
company-list/). 

229 Federal Communications Commission, Press Release: FCC Designates Huawei and ZTE as National 
Security Threats (June 30, 2020) (online at https://docs fcec.gov/public/attachments/DOC-365255A1.pdf); F.C.C. 
Designates Huawei and ZTE as National Security Threats, New York Times (June 30, 2020) (online at 
www nytimes.com/2020/06/30/technology/fcc-huawei-zte-national-security html). 


230 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEEE-00027218; Exclusive: Trump Administration Says Huawei, 
Hikvision Backed by Chinese Military, Reuters (June 24, 2020) (online at www reuters.com/article/us-usa-china- 
military-exclusive/exclusive-trump-administration-says-huawei-hikvision-backed-by-chinese-military- 
idUSKBN23V309). 


231 As noted in the Methodology section, advance deposits typically constitute only part of the total cost of 
an event. 


232 The Rise and Fall of a Belt and Road Billionaire, CNN (Dec. 12, 2018) (online at 
www.cnn.com/interactive/20 1 8/12/asia/patrick-ho-ye-jianming-cefc-trial-intl/). 


?33 Inside Hunter Bidens Multimillion-Dollar Deals with a Chinese Energy Company, Washington Post 
(Mar. 30, 2022) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2022/03/30/hunter-biden-china-laptop/). 


34 China’s CEFC Taken Over by Shanghai Government Agency: SCMP Report, Reuters (Mar. 2, 2018) 
64 


CEFC as stated-owned, and therefore does not count its expenditures as emoluments. If, 
however, the company truly became a state enterprise in March 2018, its expenditures after that 
date would constitute emoluments under the standard previously discussed. 


In 2012, Hong Kong Huaxin Petroleum Company Limited—a wholly owned subsidiary 
of CEFC—bought an apartment in Trump World Tower for $5.25 million dollars.**° Hong Kong 
Huaxin Petroleum Company Limited maintained this property throughout the Trump 
presidency.”*° Records provided to the Committee by Mazars and court documents indicate that 
Hong Kong Huaxin Petroleum Limited paid a standard common charge of $3,177.20 every 
month in 2018.77’ CEFC listed its apartment at Trump World Tower for sale on October 20, 
2020.73 On January 26, 2022, CEFC sold the unit to an anonymous LLC named “845UN 78B 
LLC” for $4.625 million.”*? 


(online at www.reuters.com/article/us-china-cefc-probe/chinas-cefc-taken-over-by-shanghai-government-agency- 
scmp-report-idUSKCN1GE0X3). 


35 Trump Tower CEFC Deal, Government Exhibit 2743 Trial of Patrick Ho, 17 CR 779 (online at 
www.documentcloud.org/documents/5448620-Trump-Tower-CEFC-Deal-2743.html). At the time, the contract of 
sale specified that the common charges for the apartment were $2,894 per month with monthly assessments of 
$1,623. Id., at Page 5. See also In re Shanghai Huaxin Group (Hongkong) Limited (in Liquidation), Southern 
District of New York, at Exhibit B (Case No.19-11482 (JLG)) (Doc. 2) (May 7, 2019) (online at 
www.chinadocket.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/002-Verified-Petition-10.pdf). 


236 New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2012030201095002 (Feb. 29, 2012) (online at 
https://a836-acris.nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2012030201095002) (accessed Dec. 
8, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2016-2017, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 
1340, Lot: 1342 (Jan. 5, 2016) (accessed Dec. 8, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment 
Roll 2017-2018, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1342 (Jan. 5, 2017) (accessed Dec. 8, 2023); New York 
City Department of Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2018-2019, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1342 (Jan. 
5, 2018) (accessed Dec. 8, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2019-2020, 
Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1342 (Jan. 5, 2019) (accessed Dec. 8, 2023); New York City Department of 
Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2020-2021, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1342 (Jan. 5, 2020) (accessed 
Dec. 8, 2023). 


237 Mazars provided records for Trump World Tower payments only for the year 2018. The 2018 records 

indicate that in addition to the standard base charge, Hongkong Huaxin Petroleum Limited incurred a standard 
charge titled “2017 SP ASSESS,” and varying electric utility fees. Per public reporting of apartment lease records, 
Hong Kong Huaxin Petroleum Limited continued to lease in the Trump World Tower at least through 2021. See 
StreetEasy, 845 United Nations Plaza #78B (online at https://streeteasy.com/building/trump-world-tower/78b) 
(accessed Nov. 29, 2023). MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027584; MAZARS- 
OVERSIGHT _COMMITTEE-00027517; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027726; MAZARS- 
OVERSIGHT _COMMITTEE-00027376; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027773; MAZARS- 
OVERSIGHT _COMMITTEE-00027680; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027633; MAZARS- 
OVERSIGHT _COMMITTEE-00027421; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027902; MAZARS- 
OVERSIGHT _COMMITTEE-00027858; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027812; MAZARS- 
OVERSIGHT _COMMITTEE-00027469. 


238 StreetEasy, 845 United Nations Plaza #78B (online at https://streeteasy.com/building/trump-world- 
tower/78b) (accessed Nov. 30, 2023). 845 U.N. 78B, LLC was incorporated on October 11, 2021, roughly three 
months prior to CEFC’s sale of Apartment 78B. OpenGov U.S., 845 UN 78B, LLC (online at 
https://opengovus.com/new-york-state-corporation/6300453) (accessed Nov. 30, 2023). 


39 New York Department of Finance, CFRN: 2022012800663001 (online at https://a836- 
acris nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2022012800663001) (accessed Nov. 30, 2023). 


65 


Assuming that the base charges did not change during the four years of the Trump 
presidency, Hong Kong Huaxin Petroleum Limited paid Trump World Tower at least $152,505 
during the four years of the Trump presidency.” 


An excerpt of the Trump World Tower payment ledger for October 2018 appears 


below:74! 
Building TWT TRUMP WORLD TOWER CONDOMINIUM Page 483 
845 UNITED NATIONS PLAZA Status Report Printed 2/5/2019 
3 - All Tenants Menu ID MSR 
October 2018 


Billing Adjustments Payment Detail Payments Summarized by | Balance Due Summarized by 


G/L Account Charge 


G/L Account 
Description Paid 
MAINTENANCEIRE! 3,177.20 


ELECTRIC INCOME 157.20 
SPECIAL ASSESSM 703.08 


Date Amount 
Paid 


10/01/18 


Lease Opening | Base Chg Miscellaneous | 
Expires | Balance Charge | Cde Charges 

HONGKONG HUAXIN 78B 0.00 3,177 20] 7 
|PETROLEUM LIMITED | 154 


| Closing 
Payment _| Balance 
4,037.48 


Amount Adjust 

Billed Total Due _|Charge Description]! Amount 

157.20 4,037.48 
703.08 


Charge Description 


ELECTRIC 
2017 SP ASSESS 


Trump Organization Business Development in China 


Documents produced to the Committee indicate that The Trump Organization, and the 
Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., may have continued to solicit business in China 
after Mr. Trump entered office—despite Trump’s pledge not to engage in any “new foreign 
deals” during his time in office.” In June 2017, Patricia Tang, the Director of Sales and 
Marketing at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., billed the hotel $1,950 as a 
reimbursable business expense for a “Hotel in China.”?” 


In November 2017—the same month that Mr. Trump made an official visit to China— 
Trump International Hotel expense reports reference a return trip to China by “Patricia,” 
potentially referring to Ms. Tang. In addition, a line item in a disbursement ledger indicates 
reimbursement for “business cards printed by [redacted] for Patricia while on China Trip in 
November 2017.”?44 Ms. Tang’s apparent active presence in China suggests that The Trump 
Organization continued to solicit business from foreign countries, especially China, during 
Trump’s presidency. 


240 Trump World Tower records for all four years of Mr. Trump’s presidency would be helpful to enable 
calculation of the total common charges paid for this apartment, but the Committee’s Minority staff is unable to 
review these records because Chairman Comer released Mazars from its obligations under the Committee’s 
subpoena before all responsive documents could be produced. 


41 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027858. 


4 Would This Violate Trump’s No-New-Foreign-Deals Pledge?, CBS News (Feb. 10, 2017) (online at 
www.cbsnews.com/news/would-this-violate-trumps-no-new-foreign-deals-pledge/). 


43 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008260. 
44 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008644. 


66 


SAUDI ARABIA 


Even the limited records that Mazars produced to the Committee make clear that former 
President Trump’s properties in Washington, D.C., and New York reaped hundreds of thousands 
of dollars in unconstitutional emoluments from the government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
between 2017 and 2020. Media reports have identified additional emoluments for which Mazars 
never provided records to the Committee; as such, the total amount of the emoluments then- 
President Trump received from the Kingdom while he was in office is likely far higher than the 
amount shown in the limited set of documents provided by Mazars. 


While he was receiving these emoluments, then-President Trump oversaw several highly 
consequential decisions on a range of issues involving U.S. policy towards Saudi Arabia, 
including the blockade by Saudi Arabia and its allies of Qatar, arms sales to Saudi Arabia, Saudi 
Arabia’s involvement in the conflict in Yemen, and the United States’ response to the 
assassination of journalist Jamal Khashoggi. 


In an unprecedented decision, and against the advice of his own Secretary of State, then- 
President Trump chose Saudi Arabia as the destination for his first foreign trip.7*° Just weeks 
after that trip, Saudi Arabia and its allies imposed a blockade against Qatar. President Trump 
expressed support for this blockade almost immediately after it began, despite the presence of a 
major U.S. military installation in Qatar.*4° President Trump also expressed public support for 
Saudi Arabia’s military intervention in Yemen, even though its controversial air campaign had 
caused a large number of civilian deaths.*4’ President Trump also supported arms sales to the 
Kingdom and vetoed a bipartisan resolution demanding an end to U.S. military support for Saudi 
actions in Yemen.”** In addition, he also worked to cast doubt publicly on the conclusion of the 
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)—his Administration’s own intelligence service—that Crown 
Prince Mohammed bin Salman (commonly identified by his initials, M.B.S.) was responsible for 
the brutal murder of Jamal Khashoggi.”” 


245 After Helping Prince’s Rise, Trump and Kushner Benefit from Saudi Funds, Washington Post (Feb. 11, 
2023) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2023/02/12/after-helping-princes-rise-trump-kushner-benefit- 
saudi-funds/). 


46 Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Other Arab Nations Cut Diplomatic Ties with Qatar, NPR (June 5, 2017) 
(online at www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/06/05/53 1548717/saudi-arabia-egypt-and-other-arab-nations-cut- 
diplomatic-ties-with-qatar); Trump Appears to Take Credit for Gulf Nations’ Move Against Qatar, CNN (June 6, 
2017) (online at www.cnn.com/2017/06/06/politics/trump-qatar-ideology/index html). 


247 What You Need to Know About the Crisis in Yemen, TIME (Nov. 3, 2016) (online at 
https://time.com/4552712/yemen-war-humanitarian-crisis-famine/); The White House, Press Release: President 
Trump’s Speech to the Arab Islamic American Summit (May 21, 2017) (online at 
https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefings-statements/president-trumps-speech-arab-islamic-american- 
summit/). 


48 Trump To Resume Precision Munitions Deliveries to Saudis: Officials, Reuters (June 13, 2017) (online 
at www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-saudi-arms-congress/trump-to-resume-precision-munitions-deliveries-to-saudis- 
officials-idUSKBN1942GG); S.J. Res. 7, 116th Cong. (2019); Trump Vetoes Measure to Force End to U.S. 
Involvement in Yemen War, New York Times (Apr. 6, 2019) (online at 
www nytimes.com/2019/04/16/us/politics/trump-veto-yemen html). 


249 Full Text: President Donald Trump’s Statement on Saudi Arabia, Khashoggi Killing, Politico (Nov. 20, 
2018) (online at www.politico.com/story/2018/1 1/20/donald-trump-statement-saudi-arabia-khashoggi-killing- 


67 


The Mazars records show that, in just the year 2018, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia paid 
then-President Trump’s business entities more than $212,000 in emoluments through the 
country’s ownership of the 45th floor of the Trump World Tower and a week-long stay in March 
2018 at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., by a Saudi government 
delegation.?>° 


While Mazars produced records for Trump World Tower only for the year 2018, Saudi 
Arabia owned its property in that building throughout the Trump Administration. Using the base 
charges incurred for the property in 2018, and assuming that those charges did not change during 
the four years of the Trump presidency, this report estimates that Saudi Arabia paid at least 
$615,422 in prohibited emoluments to former President Trump’s businesses over the course of 
his term in office from just that one property and the March 2018 stay at the Trump International 
Hotel in Washington, D.C. 


Since leaving office, former President Trump’s business ties with the Saudi royal family 
have only deepened, as Trump-owned golf courses have hosted events organized by LIV, a golf 
tour funded by Saudi Arabia’s sovereign wealth fund.**! On December 15, 2023, for example, 
former President Trump posted on social media: “TRUMP NATIONAL DORAL, in Miami, has 
just signed with LIV GOLF to host a Championship Tournament in April, 2024. The event they 
had at Doral in October was a major success!”””*? 


Acknowledging Saudi willingness to transact business with him on unusually favorable 
terms and perhaps signaling another future payback, former President Trump testified in an April 
2023 deposition regarding his Turnberry golf course in Scotland that he believed he “could sell 
that to LIV Golf for a fortune, Saudi Arabia,” among other potential buyers “for a tremendous 
amount of money, far beyond what it’s worth by the money it makes, far beyond.”?°3 


Similarly, former Senior Advisor Jared Kushner has also richly monetized his business 
ties with Saudi Arabia—teportedly with the direct assistance of M.B.S. The day after his service 
in the Trump Administration ended, Mr. Kushner formed a company that became a private equity 


1008219). 


50 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027371; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027416; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE-00027464; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027512; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_ COMMITTEE-00027577; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027628; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027675; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027721; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE-00027769; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027808; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027853; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027898; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008122 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE- 
00008 140. 


251 Over 18 Holes, Trump Praises LIV Golf, Its Saudi Backers, and His Own Courses, Washington Post 
(May 25, 2023) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/sports/2023/05/25/trump-liv-golf-washington/). 


252 Donald J. Trump (@RealDonaldTrump), Truth Social (Dec. 15, 2023) (online at 
https://truthsocial.com/@realDonaldTrump/posts/1 11584588355405636). 


°53 Transcript of Deposition of Donald J. Trump at 60-62, 177-80 (Apr. 13, 2023) (online at 
www.documentcloud.org/documents/23932452- 
452564 2022 people_of_the state of _v people of the state_of_exhibit_s 859?responsive=1 &title=1). 


68 


firm called Affinity Partners.**4 Within six months after leaving the White House, Mr. Kushner 
secured an investment reportedly worth $2 billion from Saudi Arabia’s sovereign wealth fund.”°° 


Saudi Arabia’s Emolument Spending at Trump Properties 


Date Location Expenditure Amount 
2017-2020 Trump World Tower 45th Floor of $134,2707°° 
845 United Nations Plaza Trump World (2018) 
ANew Mor NY) poe Estimated Total 
Emolument for 4 
Years: 
$537,080 
(2017-2020) 
March 7-15, 2018 | Trump International Hotel “Royal Saudi $78,3427°7 
(Washington, D.C.) Embassy 
Ministerial Visit” 
ESTIMATED EMOLUMENTS PAID BY SAUDI ARABIA $615,422 
(2017-2020) 


Before entering office, then-candidate Donald Trump spoke on several occasions about 
his transactional relationships with Saudi Arabia and Saudi business interests. During his first 
campaign speech at Trump Tower, he proclaimed, “I love the Saudis. Many are in this 
building.”*°® In August 2015, Trump said, “Saudi Arabia, I get along great with all of them. 
They buy apartments from me. They spend $40 million, $50 million.” He continued, “Am I 
supposed to dislike them? I like them very much!”?°? 


254 After Helping Prince’s Rise, Trump and Kushner Benefit from Saudi Funds, Washington Post (Feb. 11, 
2023) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2023/02/12/after-helping-princes-rise-trump-kushner-benefit- 
saudi-funds/). 


55 Before Giving Billions to Jared Kushner, Saudi Investment Fund Had Big Doubts, New York Times 
(Apr. 10, 2022) (online at www nytimes.com/2022/04/10/us/jared-kushner-saudi-investment-fund html). 


56 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027371; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027416; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027464; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027512; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027577; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027628; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE-00027675; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027721; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027769; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027808; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027853; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027898. 


257 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008122 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00008 140. 


258 Here’s Donald Trump’s Presidential Announcement Speech, TIME (June 16, 2015) (online at 
https://time.com/3923 128/donald-trump-announcement-speech/). Of note, Mazars did not produce any ledgers to 
the Committee regarding Saudi Arabia’s occupancy of any properties in Trump Tower. 


59 Trump Claims He Has “No Financial Interests in Saudi Arabia” —But He Makes Lots of Money from It, 
CNBC (Oct. 16, 2018) (online at www.cnbc.com/2018/10/16/trump-says-no-financial-interests-in-saudi-arabia-but- 
makes-money.html). 


69 


Saudi State Visit and Blockade of Qatar 


During then-President Trump’s time in office, Saudi Arabia was led by King Salman bin 
Abd al Aziz Al Saud. However, the “central figure in Saudi policymaking” was the King’s son, 
Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman (M.B.S.).7°° King Salman formally appointed M.B.S. as 
Crown Prince in June 2017 after he had served as Deputy Crown Prince from April 2015 (as well 
as in other senior government positions).7°! 


Trump’s son-in-law and then-Senior Advisor Jared Kushner arranged for then-President 
Trump to host the then-Deputy Crown Prince for a luncheon at the White House on March 14, 
2017, which Mr. Kushner joined.”® President Trump’s National Security Council urged against 
the meeting, and Secretary of State Rex Tillerson didn’t attend.”*° Notably, it was reported 
publicly in October 2018 that at some point during the Trump presidency, Kushner and M.B.S. 
established direct communications with one another on WhatsApp, a private encrypted 
messaging platform.”™ 


Reportedly, after the March 2017 luncheon, “Kushner asked Trump to make Saudi 
Arabia the site of his first foreign trip.” Then-Secretary of State Tillerson advised 
President Trump against choosing Saudi Arabia as his inaugural overseas visit and 
Trump, initially taking Tillerson’s advice, reportedly told Kushner: “Jared, read my lips: 
we’re not going to Saudi Arabia. Take no for an answer!”?° 


Then-Senior Advisor Kushner, however, reportedly refused to take no for an answer and 
continued to push for the trip, arguing that it would be an opportunity to push the Saudis to: 
“denounce terrorism in the region, sign deals that were supposed to create American jobs and 
purchase U.S. arms.”?° Ultimately, Kushner prevailed, and on May 4, 2017, then-President 
Trump announced that Saudi Arabia would be the destination of his first overseas trip.”°” 


60 Congressional Research Service, Saudi Arabia, (Feb. 4, 2022) (IFI0822) (online at 
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF 10822/17). 


261 Tq; Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, Power Behind the Throne, BBC (Oct. 6, 2020) (online 
at www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-403544 15). 


262 Trump Meets Saudi Prince as U.S. and Kingdom Seek Warmer Relations, New York Times (Mar. 14, 
2017) (online at www.nytimes.com/2017/03/14/world/middleeast/mnohammed-bin-salman-saudi-arabia-trump html). 


263 Id.; After Helping Prince’s Rise, Trump and Kushner Benefit from Saudi Funds, Washington Post (Feb. 
11, 2023) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2023/02/12/after-helping-princes-rise-trump-kushner- 
benefit-saudi-funds/). 


264 Khashoggi Disappearance Prompts Kushner Retreat from Saudi Frontlines, CNN (Oct. 18, 2018) 
(online at www.cnn.com/2018/10/17/politics/jared-kushner-saudi-ties-jamal-khashoggi/index html). 


265 After Helping Prince’s Rise, Trump and Kushner Benefit from Saudi Funds, Washington Post (Feb. 11, 
2023) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2023/02/12/after-helping-princes-rise-trump-kushner-benefit- 
saudi-funds/). 


266 Td. 


267 Saudi Arabia and Israel Will Be on Itinerary of Trump’s First Foreign Trip, New York Times (May 4, 
2017) (online at www.nytimes.com/2017/05/04/us/politics/trump-to-visit-saudi-arabia-and-israel-in-first-foreign- 
trip html). 


70 


President Trump’s choice to make Saudi Arabia the first country he visited in office was 
unprecedented, as no prior U.S. President had ever previously chosen any country in the Middle 
East as the destination for his first overseas trip.7°° Prior U.S. Presidents had almost exclusively 
chosen either Canada or Mexico as their first international destination, including President 
Trump’s five immediate predecessors as president.” Other presidents who did not choose 
Canada or Mexico as their first destination have chosen long-standing allies. For example, 
Presidents Carter and Nixon chose the United Kingdom and Belgium, respectively.””° 


In advance of the announcement of the state visit to Saudi Arabia, then-Senior Advisor 
Kushner reportedly was personally involved in arranging the arms deal that would eventually be 
signed during the visit. According to the New York Times, on May 1, 2017, Mr. Kushner 
“welcomed a high-level delegation of Saudis to a gilded reception room next door to the White 
House” and worked to arrange the “$100 billion-plus arms deal that the administration hoped to 
seal with Saudi Arabia.” News reports indicated that Mr. Kushner was so closely involved he 
even called the chief executive of Lockheed Martin to seek a price reduction for items being 
considered for inclusion in the deal.?”! 


Then-President Trump arrived in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, on May 20, 2017.77 While in 
Saudi Arabia for the state visit, President Trump and King Salman signed the arms deal that 
Senior Advisor Kushner had helped orchestrate.?”* 


Approximately three weeks after then-President Trump’s state visit to Saudi Arabia, on 
June 5, 2017, it was reported that Saudi Arabia, the U.A.E., and Egypt, among other nations, 
were “cutting all ties with Qatar.” Saudi Arabia also sealed its border with Qatar—creating a 
significant geopolitical rift in one of the most strategically sensitive regions in the world for the 
United States.?”* President Trump thereafter made a series of public statements apparently siding 
with the Saudis and U.A.E. in the dispute. 


On June 6, 2017, then-President Trump tweeted: “During my recent trip to the Middle 
East I stated that there can no longer be funding of Radical Ideology. Leaders pointed to Qatar 


268 How Trump’s First Foreign Trip Compares with Past Presidents, CNN (May 20, 2017) (online at 
www.cnn.com/2017/05/19/world/donald-trump-first-foreign-presidential-trips/index html). 


269 Id. 
270 Td. 


271 $110 Billion Weapons Sale to Saudis Has Jared Kushner’s Personal Touch, New York Times (May 18, 
2017) (online at www.nytimes.com/2017/05/18/world/middleeast/jared-kushner-saudi-arabia-arms-deal- 
lockheed.html). 


272 Donald Trump Lands in Saudi Arabia on First Overseas Visit of Presidency, NBC News (May 20, 
2017) (online at www.nbcnews.com/storyline/trump-s-first-foreign-trip/donald-trump-lands-saudi-arabia-first- 
overseas-visit-presidency-n762 126). 


23 Trump Signs Kushner-negotiated $100B Saudi Arms Deal, CNN (May 20, 2017) (online at 
www.cnn.com/2017/05/19/politics/jared-kushner-saudi-arms-deal-lockheed-martin/index html). 


274 Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Other Arab Nations Cut Diplomatic Ties with Qatar, NPR (June 5, 2017) 
(online at www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/06/05/53 1548717/saudi-arabia-egypt-and-other-arab-nations-cut- 
diplomatic-ties-with-qatar). 


val 


— look!” Later that same day, President Trump issued two consecutive tweets that explicitly 
contrasted Saudi Arabia and Qatar: “So good to see the Saudi Arabia visit with the King and 50 
countries already paying off. They said they would take a hard line on funding...” followed by 
“extremism and all reference was pointing to Qatar. Perhaps this will be the beginning of the 
end to the horror of terrorism!”?’° According to CNN, “President Donald Trump appeared to 
take credit for the decision of major Gulf nations to cut diplomatic relations with Qatar, an 
important US ally, putting his stamp of approval on the move despite Pentagon and State 
Department attempts to remain neutral.”?”’ 


While speaking to reporters on June 9, 2017, then-Secretary Tillerson appeared to 
contradict President Trump, warning, “The blockade is hindering US military actions in the 
region and the campaign against ISIS,” and he added that the United States’ “expectation is that 
these countries will immediately take steps to resolve the situation.”?” 


On June 21, 2017, King Salman named M.B.S. as the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia.?” 
Public reporting suggested that M.B.S. “used Trump’s visit to aid his sudden rise over a rival to 
become crown prince.”?*° 


On June 23, 2017, the Saudi-led coalition demanded that Qatar meet 13 conditions within 
ten days before the blockade would be lifted; among the demands were that Qatar “Curb 
diplomatic ties with Iran;” “Sever all ties to ‘terrorist organisations’” [sic]; “Stop all means 
of funding for individuals, groups or organisations [sic] that have been designated as 
terrorists by Saudi Arabia, the UAE, Egypt, Bahrain, the US and other countries;” and 
“Hand over ‘terrorist figures.’””*! 


On March 20, 2018, then-President Trump again welcomed M.B.S. to the White House. 
Noting M.B.S.’s elevation in the line of succession within Saudi Arabia compared to his position 
during his first White House visit the prior year, President Trump commented, “You are more 
than the crown prince now.”’** During the meeting, President Trump stated: 


275 Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump), X (formerly Twitter) (June 6, 2017) (online at 
https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/872062 159789985792?s=20). 


27 Tweets of June 6, 2017, The American Presidency Project, University of California, Santa Barbara 
(online at www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/tweets-june-6-2017). 


27" Trump Appears to Take Credit for Gulf Nations’ Move Against Qatar, CNN (June 6, 2017) (online at 
www.cnn.com/2017/06/06/politics/trump-qatar-ideology/index. html). 


278 Trump: Qatar Must Stop Funding Terrorism, CNN (June 10, 2017) (online at 
www.cnn.com/2017/06/09/politics/trump-qatar-saudi-gulf-crisis/index.html). 


279 Saudi King Rewrites Succession, Replacing Heir with Son, 31, New York Times (June 21, 2017) (online 
at www.nytimes.com/2017/06/2 1/world/middleeast/saudi-arabia-crown-prince-mohammed-bin-salman.html). 


280 After Helping Prince’s Rise, Trump and Kushner Benefit from Saudi Funds, Washington Post (Feb. 12, 
2023) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2023/02/12/after-helping-princes-rise-trump-kushner-benefit- 
saudi-funds/). 


81 Qatar Given 10 Days to Meet 13 Sweeping Demands by Saudi Arabia, The Guardian (June 23, 2017) 
(online at www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jun/23/close-al-jazeera-saudi-arabia-issues-qatar-with- | 3-demands-to- 
end-blockade) /bold in original source]. 


282 Saudi Prince’s White House Visit Reinforces Trump’s Commitment to Heir Apparent, New York Times 


72 


It’s a great honor to have the Crown Prince with us. Saudi Arabia has been a very great 
friend and a big purchaser of equipment and lots of other things. And one of the biggest 
investments in the United States is their—I guess it’s your big investment—is buying 
stock in companies and various other things in the United States and creating jobs.” 


In April 2018, amid reports that Saudi Arabia was “consider[ing] digging a moat along its 
border with Qatar and dumping nuclear waste nearby,” then-Secretary of State Mike Pompeo 
traveled to Saudi Arabia, where he reportedly urged his Saudi Arabian counterpart to terminate 
the blockade of Qatar.*®* Ultimately, however, the blockade remained in effect until January 5, 
2021, when “Saudi Arabia, the U.A.E., Bahrain, and Egypt agreed to lift the blockade and restore 
ties.”**> According to the Washington Post, shortly before Trump left office, Kushner flew to 
Saudi Arabia in early January 2021 for his final official meeting with M.B.S. and finalized an 
agreement to end Riyadh’s blockade against Qatar.7*° 


President Trump Advances Large-Scale Arms Sales to Saudi Arabia 


Then-President Trump pushed for increased arms sales to Saudi Arabia even after reports 
showed that the Saudi military used these weapons with disregard for the lives of civilians who 
have been caught in the years-long conflict in Yemen. 


In March 2015, Saudi Arabia entered the ongoing civil war in Yemen by initiating “an air 
campaign against the Houthis” and “a naval blockade.””°’ The Houthis had previously ousted 
Yemen’s leader, Abd Rabbu Mansour Hadi; the Saudi objective has ostensibly been to restore the 
Hadi government. According to one analysis, “Saudi Arabia’s perception that the Houthis are an 
Iranian proxy rather than an indigenous movement has driven Riyadh’s military intervention.”?°* 
The Saudi intervention has been supported by the U.A.E.7°? 


(Mar. 20, 2018) (online at www.nytimes.com/2018/03/20/us/politics/saudi-crown-prince-arrives-at-white-house-to- 
meet-with-trump html). 


83 The White House, Remarks by President Trump and Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman of the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia Before Bilateral Meeting (Mar. 20, 2018) (online at 
https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefings-statements/remarks-president-trump-crown-prince-mohammed-bin- 
salman-kingdom-saudi-arabia-bilateral-meeting/). 


284 Pompeo’s Message to Saudis? Enough Is Enough: Stop Qatar Blockade, New Y ork Times (Apr. 28, 
2018) (online at www.nytimes.com/2018/04/28/world/middleeast/mike-pompeo-saudi-arabia-qatar-blockade html). 


285 Congressional Research Service, Qatar: Governance, Security, and U.S. Policy (Apr. 11, 2022) 
(R44533) (online at https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R44533). 


286 After Helping Prince’s Rise, Trump and Kushner Benefit from Saudi Funds, Washington Post (Feb. 12, 
2023) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2023/02/12/after-helping-princes-rise-trump-kushner-benefit- 
saudi-funds/). 

°87 Timeline: Yemen War Began in 2014 When Houthis Seized Sanaa, Associated Press (Feb. 11, 2021) 
(online at https://apnews.com/article/joe-biden-saudi-arabia-ali-abdullah-saleh-united-arab-emirates-coronavirus- 
pandemic-7alc185cbd6cfb8 1 5dfbf7c21dflc0el). 


°88 Yemen’s Tragedy: War, Stalemate, and Suffering, Council on Foreign Relations (May 1, 2023) (online 
at www.cfr.org/backgrounder/yemen-crisis). 


289 Td. 


73 


By late 2016, the conflict in Yemen was causing a humanitarian crisis that was “pushing 
the country to the brink of famine,” as Saudi Arabia’s air campaign was causing numerous 
civilian casualties.2°° Nonetheless, in his prepared remarks for the Arab Islamic American 
Summit held during his state visit to Saudi Arabia in May 2017, then-President Trump expressed 
support for the Saudi effort in Yemen.”?! 


In early June 2017, then-President Trump notified Congress that his Administration 
intended to deliver precision-guided bombs to Saudi Arabia, fulfilling part of a 2015 arms sale. 
Former President Obama had blocked the arms delivery in late 2016 over concerns about civilian 
deaths in Yemen, including the bombing of a funeral in October 2016 that killed and wounded 
hundreds of civilians.*?? A 2017 report issued by Human Rights Watch documented 58 
apparently unlawful airstrikes in the country, killing nearly 800 civilians and hitting homes, 
markets, hospitals, schools, civilian businesses, and mosques.?”? 


In August 2018, Saudi jets reportedly bombed a bus packed with schoolchildren in 
northern Yemen, which “killed at least 40 students aged 6 to 11 and left dozens more 
wounded.”?** According to the New York Times, the bombs used in this attack were “American- 
made.”””> Despite this, the next month, the Trump Administration issued a formal certification 
affirming that Saudi Arabia and its coalition partner, the U.A.E., were “undertaking... 
appropriate measures to alleviate the humanitarian crisis in Yemen” and “demonstrable actions to 
reduce the risk of harm to civilians.”*”° This certification “was legally required to allow 
American military aircraft to continue refueling warplanes” flown by Saudi Arabia and the 
U.A.E.27 


290 What You Need to Know About the Crisis in Yemen, TIME (Nov. 3, 2016) (online at 
https://time.com/4552712/yemen-war-humanitarian-crisis-famine/). 


2°! The White House, Press Release: President Trump’s Speech to the Arab Islamic American Summit 
(May 21, 2017) (online at https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefings-statements/president-trumps-speech-arab- 
islamic-american-summit/). 


292 U.S. Blocks Arms Sale to Saudi Arabia Amid Concerns Over Yemen War, New Y ork Times (Dec. 13, 
2016) (online at www.nytimes.com/2016/12/13/us/politics/saudi-arabia-arms-sale-yemen-war html); What You Need 
to Know About the Crisis in Yemen, TIME (Nov. 3, 2016) (online at https://time.com/45527 12/yemen-war- 
humanitarian-crisis-famine/); Trump To Resume Precision Munitions Deliveries to Saudis: Officials, Reuters (June 
13, 2017) (online at www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-saudi-arms-congress/trump-to-resume-precision-munitions- 
deliveries-to-saudis-officials-idUSKBN1942GG). 


293 Human Rights Watch World Report 2017: Yemen—Events of 2016 (online at www hrw.org/world- 
report/2017/country-chapters/yemen) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023). 


2°4 One American’s Failed Quest to Protect Civilians in Yemen, The Atlantic (Aug. 17, 2018) (online at 
www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/20 18/08/yemen-saudi-airstrike-school-bus/567799/). 


2°5 War Crime Risk Grows for U.S. Over Saudi Strikes in Yemen, New York Times (Sept. 14, 2020) (online 
at www.nytimes.com/2020/09/14/us/politics/us-war-crimes-yemen-saudi-arabia html). 


2°6 Certification under Section 1290 of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2019 (DIV. A, Pub. L. 115-232) Related to Military Assistance for Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates 
(Sept. 10, 2018) (online at www.documentcloud.org/documents/4873723-Pompeo-Certification-Under-NDAA-for- 
Saudi-Arabia.html). 


°7 Yemen Civilians Keep Dying, but Pompeo Says Saudis Are Doing Enough, New York Times (Sept. 12, 
2018) (online at www.nytimes.com/2018/09/12/world/middleeast/saudi-yemen-pompeo-certify.html). 


74 


In April 2019, after the killing of Jamal Khashoggi discussed below, then-President 
Trump vetoed a bipartisan resolution demanding the end of U.S. military support for the Saudi- 
led war.7°8 


Killing of Jamal Khashoggi 


On October 2, 2018, Saudi agents brutally “executed and dismembered” journalist, U.S. 
resident, and regime-critic Jamal Khashoggi. The CIA quickly determined that Crown Prince 
M.B:S. ordered the murder.”’ In response to Mr. Khashoggi’s murder, then-President Trump 
cast doubt publicly on U.S. intelligence assessments regarding the murder, stating: 


Representatives of Saudi Arabia say that Jamal Khashoggi was an “enemy of the state” 
and a member of the Muslim Brotherhood, but my decision is in no way based on that— 
this is an unacceptable and horrible crime. King Salman and Crown Prince Mohammad 
bin Salman vigorously deny any knowledge of the planning or execution of the murder of 
Mr. Khashoggi. Our intelligence agencies continue to assess all information, but it could 
very well be that the Crown Prince had knowledge of this tragic event—maybe he did 
and maybe he didn’t!>”° 


At the time, Republican Senator Bob Corker, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee, expressed disbelief at the President’s deflections stating, “I never thought I’d see the 
day a White House would moonlight as a public relations firm for the Crown Prince of Saudi 
Arabia” and gave his own assessment of the intelligence surrounding Mr. Khashoggi’s 
assassination: “If the crown prince went in front of a jury, he would be convicted in 30 
minutes.”*°! 


According to the Washington Post, then-President Trump’s support for M.B.S. “helped 
rehabilitate Mohammed on the world stage.”°°* On October 16, 2018, then-Secretary of State 


298 S.J. Res. 7, 116th Cong. (2019); Trump Vetoes Measure to Force End to U.S. Involvement in Yemen 
War, New York Times (Apr. 6, 2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/04/16/us/politics/trump-veto-yemen.html). 


2°9 CIA Concludes Saudi Crown Prince Ordered Jamal Khashoggi’s Assassination, Washington Post (Nov. 
16, 2018) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/cia-concludes-saudi-crown-prince-ordered- 
jamal-khashoggis-assassination/20 18/1 1/16/98c89fe6-e9b2-1 1e8-a939-9469f1 166f9d_story html); UN Report Finds 
“Credible Evidence” Linking Saudi Crown Prince to Jamal Khashoggi’s Execution, Salon (June 19, 2019) (online 
at www.salon.com/2019/06/19/un-report-finds-credible-evidence-linking-saudi-crown-prince-to-jamal-khashoggis- 
execution/). 


300 Full Text: President Donald Trump’s Statement on Saudi Arabia, Khashoggi Killing, Politico (Nov. 20, 
2018) (online at www.politico.com/story/2018/1 1/20/donald-trump-statement-saudi-arabia-khashoggi-killing- 
1008219). 


30! The Ugly Story of Trump and Jamal Khashoggi is Confirmed, Washington Post (Feb. 27, 2021) (online 
at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/202 1/02/26/why-intel-report-jamal-khashoggi-is-so-damning-trump/); Trump 
Signals US Won’t Punish Saudi Crown Prince Over Khashoggi Killing, CNN (Dec. 10, 2018) (online at 
www.cnn.com/2018/1 1/20/politics/trump-saudi-arabia/index html). 


30 Jamal Khashoggi’s Death Made the Saudi Crown Prince a Pariah. Trump Has Helped Rehabilitate 
Him on the World Stage., Washington Post (Sept. 28, 2019) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/national- 
security/jamal-khashoggis-death-made-the-saudi-crown-prince-a-pariah-trump-has-helped-rehabilitate-him-on-the- 
world-stage/2019/09/28/3365b8be-e 1 3c-1 1e9-b199-f638bf2c340f story html). 


75 


Pompeo met with the King of Saudi Arabia and with M.B:S. in Riyadh.*° According to Mr. 
Pompeo’s memoir, “he was the first Western official to see MBS since Khashoggi’s murder.”>** 
President Trump reportedly expressed an awareness of the Crown Prince’s indebtedness to him: 
Pompeo’s memoir notes that ahead of his meeting with the Crown Prince, President Trump told 
him, “My Mike, go and have a good time. Tell him he owes us.’”>° 


Emoluments Paid by Saudi Arabia to Trump-Owned Businesses 


In 2001, Saudi Arabia purchased the entire 45th floor of Trump World Tower in New 
York for a reported sale price of $4.5 million.°°° Saudi Arabia owned this property for all four 
years of the Trump Presidency.*°’ In 2018—the year covered by the records provided to the 
Committee by Mazars—the 45th floor units incurred a monthly base charge of $11,189.21, 
yielding an annual total of $134,270 in such charges. Assuming that the monthly base charge 
incurred by the 45th floor did not change over the course of the four years of the Trump 
Administration, Saudi Arabia would have incurred charges totaling $537,080. The Mazars 
records for the year 2018 also show that in addition to the monthly base charges, the units 
incurred a monthly special assessment of $2,476 for each of the ten months from January 
through October 2018—totaling an additional $24,760.°°° Because special assessments may 


303 Pompeo Meets with King, Crown Prince in Saudi Arabia Amid Khashoggi Disappearance, NBC News 
(Oct. 16, 2018) (online at www nbcnews.com/news/world/pompeo-lands-saudi-arabia-talks-king-salman-over- 
khashoggi-disappearance-n920556). 


304 Washington Post Editorial Board, Mike Pompeo’s Revolting Embrace of MBS After the Khashoggi 
Murder, Washington Post (Jan. 24, 2023) (online at www. washingtonpost.com/opinions/2023/01/24/mike-pompeo- 
book-mbs-jamal-khashoggi-murder/). 


3° Trump Signals US Won’t Punish Saudi Crown Prince Over Khashoggi Killing, CNN (Dec. 10, 2018) 
(online at www.cnn.com/2018/11/20/politics/trump-saudi-arabia/index.html); After Helping Prince’s Rise, Trump 
and Kushner Benefit from Saudi Funds, Washington Post (Feb. 12, 2023) (online at 
www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2023/02/12/after-helping-princes-rise-trump-kushner-benefit-saudi-funds/). 


306 EXCLUSIVE: Donald Trump Made Millions from Saudi Arabia, but Trashes Hillary Clinton for Saudi 
Donations to Clinton Foundation, New York Daily News (Sept. 4, 2016) (online at 
www nydailynews.com/news/politics/exclusive-donald-trump-made-millions-saudi-government-article- 1.277721 1). 


3°7 New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2004072700986001 (online at https://a836- 
acris nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2008090401549001) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); 
New York City Department of Finance, Notice of Property Value, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1176 
(Jan. 15, 2016) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2017-2018, 
Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1176 (Jan. 5, 2017) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of 
Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2018-2019, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1176 (Jan. 5, 2018) (accessed 
Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2019-2020, Borough: Manhattan, 
Block: 1340, Lot: 1176 (Jan. 5, 2019) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023) New York City Department of Finance, Final 
Assessment Roll 2020-2021, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1176 (Jan. 5, 2020) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); 
New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2021-2022, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 
1176 (Jan. 5, 2021) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023). 


308 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027371; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027416; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027464; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027512; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027577; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027628; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027675; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027721; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027769; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027808; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE-00027853; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 


76 


vary from year to year, this report does not include them in the estimated total emoluments paid 
by Saudi Arabia for the property in Trump World Tower. 


Following the imposition of the blockade on Qatar—and just before M.B.S.’s second visit 
to the White House to meet with President Trump on March 20, 2018—the government of Saudi 
Arabia booked rooms at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., from March 7 to 
March 15, 2018. The Saudi Ministry of Defense paid $78,342 to the Trump International Hotel 
for this one-week stay, including one suite charged at $10,500 per night for two nights.°” 
Although the records largely anonymize the identities of the Saudi delegation members who 
stayed at the hotel, two officials staying at the hotel are referred to as “His Excellency,” 
indicating that Saudi Royal family members or senior government ministers were patronizing the 
Trump International Hotel.*!° The bill included numerous charges for amenities, including a 
$2,000 charge for “Coffee Table Flowers for all suites + amenities + 2 Gold and Dark Green 
Macaroon Towers.”*'! Two pages of the bill for the Royal Saudi Embassy Ministerial visit in 
March 2018 are excerpted below:*'” 


00027898. 


309 After the Committee began receiving documents from Mazars showing emolument spending by foreign 
nations at Trump-owned properties while Donald Trump was President, then-Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney 
wrote to Debra Steidel Wall, the Acting Archivist of the United States, on November 14, 2022, requesting 
presidential records regarding “foreign governments’ attempts to influence the Trump Administration.” The 
Committee’s November 2022 letter cited total spending by Saudi Arabia of $85,961 for that country’s March 2018 
stay at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C. A close review of the receipt provided by Mazars for this 
stay shows that $9,619 in taxes were removed from the total due with the notation “Mission tax Exempt.” The 
Trump International Hotel’s classification of this stay as tax exempt is a clear indication that an expenditure by a 
foreign government occurred in violation of the Constitution’s Foreign Emoluments Clause. Other smaller debits 
and credits were also added and subtracted from the bill, yielding a total of $78,342, which equals the amount of the 
“check” recorded as payment on the receipt. As such, this report identifies the total amount of the expenditure made 
by the Saudi government for this stay—and thus the total emolument spending—as $78,342. See Letter from 
Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Debra Steidel Wall, Acting Archivist of 
the United States, National Archives and Records Administration (Nov. 14, 2022) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/2022-11- 
14.CBM%20to%20Steidel%20Wall-NARA%20re%20Mazars%20Docs.pdf). 


310 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008122 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00008 140. 


311 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-0008139. 
312 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-0008122 and MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
0008139. 


di. 


TRUMP’ INTERNATIONAL HOTEL 


WASHINGTON, DC 


Royal Saudi Embassy Ministerial Visit Confirmation Number: 5504680 
1001 30th St NW Room Number: 
Washington, DC 20007 Room Type: 
No. of Guests: 
ARRIVAL DEPARTURE RATE PLAN ACCOUNT 
Mar 7, 2018 12:00:00 AM Mar 15, 2018 12:00:00 AM 43128 
Room Number Confirmation Number Name 
Date Code DESCRIP COMMENTS Amount (USD) 
45646763-1 
03/11/2018 491250 Cancellation Fee Rooms $495.00 
03/11/2018 723207 OC Occupancy Sales Tax $73.26 
SUBTOTAL: $568.26 
09 92995643-1 pes 2 5 
03/11/2018 101000 Room Charge $895.00 
03/11/2018 723207 DC Occupancy Sales Tax $132.46 
03/12/2018 863201 In Room Dining Lunch 20180312 111629 2034 242380'0104/0104/2034/0000/Lunch $114.84 
03/12/2018 851200 in Room Dining F&B Tax $10.44 
10% 
03/12/2018 851200 ta Dining F&B Tax ($10.44) 
1 
03/12/2018 880201 in Room Dining Lunch $83.00 
03/12/2018 850210 In Room Dining $4.00 
Miscellaneous 
03/12/2018 852200 In Room Dining Service $17.40 
Charge 
03/12/2018 851200 in Room Dining F&B Tax $10.44 
10% 
03/12/2018 853201 In Room Dining Lunch 20180312 111629 2034 242380/0104'0104/2034/0000/Lunch ($114.84) 
03/12/2018 101459 Porterage eee $12.00 
03/12/2018 101805 Laundry/Dry Cleaning #3033 ' $93.00 
03/12/2018 723234 Sales Tax $5.35 
03/12/2018 OFFLAU Offset Laundry ($5.35) 
03/12/2018 101000 Room Charge $895.00 
03/12/2018 723207 DC Occupancy Sales Tax $132.46 
03/13/2018 853200 in Room Dining Breakfast 20180313 092325 2100 $91.08 
242380/0104/0104/2100/0000) Breakfast 
03/13/2018 851203 in Room Dining F&B Tax $8.28 
10% 
03/13/2018 851200 reas Dining F&B Tax ($8.28) 
1 
03/13/2018 850200 In Room Dining Breakfast $65.00 
03/13/2018 850210 In Room Dining $4.00 
Miscellaneous 
03/13/2018 882200 In Room Dining Service $13.80 
Charge 
03/13/2018 851200 In Room Dining F&B Tax $8.28 
10% 
03/13/2018 883200 in Room Dining Breakfast 20180313 092325 2100 ($91.08) 
242380/0104'0104/2100/0000) Breakfast 
03/13/2018 101805 Laundry/Dry Cleaning Check 3967 $59.00 
03/13/2018 723234 Sales Tax $3.39 
03/13/2018 OFFLAU Offset Laundry ($3.39) 
SUBTOTAL: $2,424.84 
509 45993136-1 Datt , His Excellency Saudi 
03/11/2018 853502 Benjamin Dinner 20180311 215811 1166 242377/0085/0085/1166/0000'Dinner $452.40 
03/11/2018 8506502 Benjamin's Dinner $377.00 
03/11/2018 852500 Benjamin Gratuities $75.40 
03/11/2018 863502 Benjamin Dinner 20180311 215811 1166 242377/0085/0085/1166/0000'Dinner (3452.40) 
03/11/2018 101000 Room Charge $10,500.00 
12/19/2018 19:59 1100 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, D.C 20004 Phone Page 1 


2026951100 TrumpHotels.com 


78 


5504680 


Royal Saudi Embassy Ministerial Visit 


03/12/2018 853300 Minibar 20180312 110721 992 $375.00 
242370/0083/0083/992/0000/NoMeaiPeriod 
03/12/2018 852300 Minibar-Gratuities $375.00 
03/12/2018 852300 Minibar Gratuities ($375.00) 
03/12/2018 852300 Minibar Gratuities $375.00 
03/12/2018 853300 Minibar 20180312 140721 992 ($375.00) 
242370/0083/0083/992/0000/NoMeaiPeriod 
03/15/2018 999100 Miscellaneous Coffee Table Flowers for all suites + amenities + 2 Gold and $2,000.00 
Dark Green Macaroon Towers 
03/20/2018 923900 Rooms Tax Exempt Mission tax Exempt - 4027-6677-50 ($9,619.26) 
06/13/2018 CHK Check ($78,342.00) 
06/13/2018 251599 Adj - Minibar Food ($375.00) 
TOTAL: ($85,961.26) 
TOTAL DUE: 0 


During the spring of 2018, Saudi royalty also reportedly patronized other Trump 
properties, in addition to the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C. In late March, 
while visiting the United States, the Crown Prince and his entourage traveled to New York City 
where they reportedly stayed at the Trump International Hotel.*!> The Washington Post reported 
that this boosted the hotel’s revenue by 13% for the entire quarter.*'4 However, the Committee 
did not receive any records related to these stays from Mazars; therefore, they are not included 
among the emolument figures presented in this report. 


Lobbyist Spending 


In addition to spending directly by the Saudi government, the Washington Post reported 
that “[l]obbyists representing the Saudi government reserved blocks of rooms at President 
Trump’s Washington, D.C., hotel shortly after Trump’s election in 2016—paying for an 
estimated 500 nights at the luxury hotel in just three months.”*!? For example, according to 
filings with the DOJ pursuant to the Foreign Agents Registration Act (FARA), for the six-month 
period ending March 31, 2017, one lobbying firm spent $270,044 at the Trump International 
Hotel from October 2016 through March 2017 on behalf of the Saudi government in order to 
bring veterans to Capitol Hill to lobby Congress against the Justice Against Sponsors of 
Terrorism Act—a law permitting victims of the September 11, 2001, attacks to sue Saudi Arabia 
for its role in facilitating the attacks.*!° In many cases, the lobbyists organizing the trips 
reportedly did not tell the veterans that Saudi Arabia was paying for their travel and lodging. 


313 At President Trump’s Hotel in New York, Revenue Went Up This Spring—Thanks to A Visit from Big- 
Spending Saudis, Washington Post (Aug. 3, 2018) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/at-president-trumps- 
hotel-in-new-york-revenue-went-up-this-spring--thanks-to-a-visit-from-big-spending-saudis/20 1 8/08/03/58755392- 
9112-1 1e8-bed5-9d911c¢784c38_ story html). While Committee Democrats and Mazars had engaged in preliminary 
discussions regarding documents related to Saudi Arabia in addition to the ones produced to the Committee, 
Chairman Comer informed Mazars that he would no longer be enforcing the subpoena before searches related to this 
stay could be completed. 


314 Td. 


315 Saudi-Funded Lobbyist Paid For 500 Rooms at Trump’s Hotel After 2016 Election, Washington Post 
(Dec. 5, 2018) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/saudi-funded-lobbyist-paid-for-500-rooms-at-trumps- 
hotel-after-2016-election/2018/12/05/29603a64-f4 17-1 1e8-bc79-68604ed88993_story.html). 


316 Department of Justice, Supplemental Statement Pursuant to the Foreign Agents Registration Act of 
1938, As Amended (May 31, 2017) (online at https://efile.fara.gov/docs/5483-Supplemental-Statement-20170531- 
25.pdf). 


79 


Veterans reported they were sent to lobby on the Hill even “when the issue was largely dormant 
and Washington was distracted by a new president’s inauguration,” raising suspicions amongst 
veterans that the purpose of their trips was not to accomplish legislative goals but to funnel 
money from Saudi Arabia to the Trump International Hotel.*!” 


The Mazars ledgers for the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., provided to 
the Committee for December 2016 show four advance deposit payments for “Veteran Fly in” 
groups for January 2017: one $9,000 payment labeled “Veteran Fly In—January 5”; one $16,000 
payment labeled “Veteran Fly In—January 10”; one $11,000 payment labeled “Veteran Fly In— 
January 16”; and one $16,000 payment labeled “Veteran Fly In—January 23.”3'8 The Mazars 
ledgers do not identify who made these payments and do not identify any specific veterans who 
ultimately stayed at the hotel. For this reason, this report does not include these payments among 
the total emoluments paid by Saudi Arabia. However, the timing of and ledger descriptions for 
the payments coincide with the Saudi lobbying activity reported in the FARA filing noted above. 


Trump’s Post-Presidency Business Ties to Saudi Arabia 


President Trump apparently had no branded businesses in Saudi Arabia while he was 
President. According to the Washington Post, prior to his election, he had “seemed to be 
exploring plans to build a hotel in Jiddah” but the “shell companies” created for such potential 
business were dissolved in 2016.7!” 


Since his term ended, however, former President Trump has expanded his business 
relationships with Saudi Arabia significantly. He has “aligned himself closely with LIV,” a golf 
tour that “Saudi Arabia’s sovereign wealth fund bankrolled with at least $2 billion.”°”° Public 
reporting indicates that “the Saudi Arabia Public Investment Fund (PIF), a sovereign wealth fund 
headed by the country’s Crown Prince, Mohammed bin Salman (MBS), owns 93 percent of LIV 
and pays 100 percent of the costs associated with its events.”*?! Former President Trump has 
repeatedly praised LIV; in October 2022, he said: “It’s big time and it’s big-time money. It’s 
unlimited money. They love golf and the Saudis have done a fantastic job.”*”? The Washington 


317 Saudi-Funded Lobbyist Paid For 500 Rooms at Trump’s Hotel After 2016 Election, Washington Post 
(Dec. 5, 2018) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/saudi-funded-lobbyist-paid-for-500-rooms-at-trumps- 
hotel-after-2016-election/2018/12/05/29603a64-f4 17-1 1e8-bc79-68604ed88993_story.html). 


318 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00010198; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00010199; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00010200. 


319 «7 Like Them Very Much:’ Trump Has Long-Standing Business Ties with Saudis, Who Have Boosted 
His Hotels Since He Took Office, Washington Post (Oct. 11, 2018) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/i- 
like-them-very-much-trump-has-long-standing-business-ties-with-saudis-who-have-boosted-his-hotels-since-he- 
took-office/2018/10/1 1/0870df24-cd67-1 1e8-a360-85875bac0b1f_story html). 


320 Over 18 Holes, Trump Praises LIV Golf, Its Saudi Backers, and His Own Courses, Washington Post 
(May 25, 2023) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/sports/2023/05/25/trump-liv-golf-washington/); What Is LIV 
Golf? It Depends Whom You Ask., New York Times (May 22, 2023) (online at www.nytimes.com/article/liv-golf- 
saudi-arabia-pga html). 


321 Donald Trump’s Saudi Arabia Payments Spark Calls for Fresh Investigation, Newsweek (Jan. 16, 2023) 
(online at www.newsweek.com/trump-liv-golf-saudi-payments-dawn- 1773996). 


322 Trump Criticizes PGA Tour, Says ‘Saudis Have Done a Fantastic Job’ with LIV, CNBC (Oct. 27, 2022) 
80 


Post reported that as of May 25, 2023, Trump-owned golf courses had “hosted two events last 
year and will host three this season’”—which “is believed to be a lucrative arrangement for 
Trump, though neither side has revealed details.”*?? As noted above, on December 15, 2023, 
former President Trump posted on social media that LIV would stage a tournament in 2024 at the 
Trump National Doral golf course.*”4 


Former President Trump has also boasted about the continued willingness of the Saudis 
to do business on terms highly favorable to him. During a deposition in the lawsuit that the New 
York State Attorney General brought against him for defrauding banks and insurers by inflating 
his net worth by billions of dollars, Trump testified that he could sell one of his golf courses to 
the Saudis “for a fortune” and at a price “far beyond what you would say it’s worth by the money 
it makes, far beyond.”°”> He also testified that he could sell a mansion in suburban New York, 
which he described as “the best house in the State of New York,” to “one buyer from Saudi 
Arabia” for $291 million, the figure at which Trump had valued it. In ruling that Mr. Trump and 
the other defendants committed fraud, the judge handling the case observed that the latter 
statement “may suggest influence buying more than savvy investing.””*”° 


Former President Trump’s son-in-law and Senior Advisor Jared Kushner has also richly 
monetized his business ties with Saudi Arabia after leaving government—reportedly through the 
direct assistance of M.B.S. As discussed, just one day after leaving government service, Mr. 
Kushner formed a company that would become a private equity firm.*?” Within six months, Mr. 
Kushner’s firm had secured an investment reportedly worth $2 billion from the Saudi sovereign 
wealth fund, the PIF.*?® The panel charged with reviewing investment opportunities for the fund 
reportedly raised several concerns about the proposed deal, including “the inexperience of the 
Affinity Fund management,” the prospect of Saudi Arabia bearing responsibility for “the bulk of 
the investment and risk,” due diligence showing the firm’s operations to be “unsatisfactory in all 
aspects,” a proposed management fee that “seem[ed] excessive,” and “public relations risks” 
stemming from Mr. Kushner’s prior White House role. Despite these grave objections to the 
soundness of the transaction, M.B.S. reportedly “overruled” the panel and approved the 


(online at www.cnbc.com/2022/10/27/trump-criticizes-pga-tour-praises-saudis-liv.html). 


323 Over 18 Holes, Trump Praises LIV Golf, Its Saudi Backers, and His Own Courses, Washington Post 
(May 25, 2023) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/sports/2023/05/25/trump-liv-golf-washington/). 


324 Donald J. Trump (@RealDonaldTrump), Truth Social (Dec. 15, 2023) (online at 
https://truthsocial.com/@realDonaldTrump/posts/1 11584588355405636). 


325 Transcript of Deposition of Donald J. Trump at 60-61, 177-80 (Apr. 13, 2023) (online at 
www.documentcloud.org/documents/23932452- 
452564 2022 people of_the state _of_v_ people of the state _of_exhibit_s 859). 


326 People of the State of New York v. Donald J. Trump, et al., Index No. 452564/2022 at 21 and 21 n.10 
(N.Y. Sup. Ct. Sept. 26, 2023) (online at www.documentcloud.org/documents/2399 1872-ny-ruling-on-trump- 
business-fraud). 


27 After Helping Prince’s Rise, Trump and Kushner Benefit from Saudi Funds, Washington Post (Feb. 11, 
2023) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2023/02/12/after-helping-princes-rise-trump-kushner-benefit- 
saudi-funds/). 


328 Before Giving Billions to Jared Kushner, Saudi Investment Fund Had Big Doubts, New York Times 
(Apr. 10, 2022) (online at www nytimes.com/2022/04/10/us/jared-kushner-saudi-investment-fund html). 


81 


investment.*”? Representative James Comer, Chairman of the Committee on Oversight and 
Accountability, has acknowledged that this arrangement “crossed the line of ethics.”*°° Despite 
this admission, however, Chairman Comer has allowed Mr. Kushner to defy and ignore 
Committee Democrats’ repeated document requests, and Chairman Comer has rejected requests 
by the Committee’s Democratic Members that he issue a subpoena to compel Mr. Kushner’s 
compliance.**! 


Kushner’s fund likewise reportedly received $200 million investments from the sovereign 
wealth fund of the U.A.E. and a Qatari entity shortly after he left the Administration.** 


Because these payments post-dated Donald Trump’s presidency, they may not be 
emoluments within the meaning of the Constitution unless they were negotiated during the 
course of his presidency. In any event, however, their timing raises profound concerns that 
former President Trump and his family engaged in self-dealing during his Administration by 
making critical U.S. policy decisions regarding Saudi Arabia that were designed to further their 
personal financial interests rather than the national security interests of the United States. 


329 Td. 


339 Comer Says Kushner ‘Crossed the Line of Ethics’ with Saudi Deal, The Hill (Aug. 11, 2023) (online at 
https://thehill.com/blogs/blog-briefing-room/news/4 14895 1 -comer-says-kushner-crossed-the-line-of-ethics-with- 
saudi-deal/). 


331 See e.g. Letter from Ranking Member Jamie Raskin, Committee on Oversight and Accountability, to 
Jared Kushner, Founder and Chief Executive Officer, A Fin Management LLC (Feb. 15, 2023) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/2023-02- 
15.%20JBR%20to%20Kushner%20re%20Saudi%20Arabia.fnl_.pdf); Letter from Ranking Member Jamie Raskin to 
Chairman James Comer, Committee on Oversight and Accountability (Aug. 31, 2023) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/2023-08- 
31.JBR%20to%20Comer%20re%20Kushner%20Subpoena.pdf). 


332 Kushner Firm Got Hundreds of Millions From 2 Persian Gulf Nations, New York Times (Mar. 30, 
2023) (online at www.nytimes.com/2023/03/30/us/politics/jared-kushner-qatar-united-arab-emirates.html). 


82 


ATAR 


The documents provided to the Committee by Mazars show that, in 2018, Qatar paid 
more than $130,000 in emoluments for units in Trump World Tower in New York.*** Prior to 
President Trump’s election as President, Qatar already owned three units in Trump World Tower. 
In January 2018—after Saudi Arabia’s blockade of Qatar had been underway for more than six 
months—Qatar bought an additional unit in Trump World Tower.**4 Later in 2018, Qatar sold 
one of the units it already owned which had incurred lower monthly charges than the unit it 
purchased earlier that year. As a result of these transactions, the monthly charges Qatar paid to 
Trump World Tower increased from $8,592 before its 2018 purchase and subsequent sale to 
settle at $9,540 in late 2018. Accounting for the country’s 2018 purchase and sale, this report 
estimates that Qatar paid $465,744 to the Trump World Tower for the properties it owned during 
President Trump’s term in office.**° 


333 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027357 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027885. 


334 Qatar bought the unit from an entity called 61-02 81st Street LLC. The Committee’s Democratic staff 
does not know who the beneficial owner of this entity is. See New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 
2018012900694001 (Jan. 17, 2018) (online https://a836- 
acris nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2018012900694001) (accessed Dec. 7, 2023). 


335 Id.; Trump Set to Benefit as Qatar Buys $6.5m Apartment in New York Tower, The Guardian (May 4, 
2018) (online at www.theguardian.com/us-news/2018/may/04/trump-qatar-buys-apartment-new-york-tower); New 
York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2004030501059003 (online at https://a836- 
acris nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2004030501059003) (accessed Aug. 23, 2023); 
New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2012112901543003 (online at https://a836- 
acris nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2012112901543003) (accessed Aug. 23, 2023); 
New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2012120301328001 (online at https://a836- 
acris nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2012120301328001) (accessed Aug. 23, 2023); 
New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2018100500569001 (Oct. 3, 2018) (online https://a836- 
acris nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2018100500569001) (accessed Dec. 7, 2023); 
New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2018012900694001 (Jan. 17, 2018) (online https://a836- 
acris nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2018012900694001) (accessed Dec. 7, 2023); 
New York City Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 2016-2017, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1214 
(Jan. 5, 2016) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 2017-2018, 
Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1214 (Jan. 5, 2017) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of 
Finance, Assessment Roll 2018-2019, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1214 (Jan. 5, 2018) (accessed Dec. 6, 
2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2019-2020, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 
1340, Lot: 1214 (Jan. 5, 2019) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment 
Roll 2020-2021, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1214 (Jan. 5, 2020) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York 
City Department of Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2021-2022, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1214 (Jan. 
5, 2021) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 2018-2019, Borough: 
Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1217 (Jan. 5, 2018) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, 
Final Assessment Roll 2019-2020, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1217 (Jan. 5, 2019) (accessed Dec. 6, 
2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2020-2021, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 
1340, Lot: 1217 (Jan. 5, 2020) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment 
Roll 2021-2022, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1217 (Jan. 5, 2021) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York 
City Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 2016-2017, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1011 (Jan. 5, 
2016) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 2017-2018, Borough: 
Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1011 (Jan. 5, 2017) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, 
Assessment Roll 2016-2017, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1220 (Jan. 5, 2016) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); 
New York City Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 2017-2018, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1220 
(Jan. 5, 2017) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 2018-2019, 


83 


The documents provided by Mazars also record an extended stay at the Trump 
International Hotel in Washington, D.C., from January through March 2018 that frequently 
encompassed multiple rooms booked under the names of the “Sheikh Al Thani family” or 
“Khalid Al Thani.” Al Thani is the name of Qatar’s ruling family.*°° In November 2022, after 
then-Committee Chairwoman Maloney sent a letter to the National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA) identifying the Al Thani family stay at the Trump International Hotel as 
an expenditure by the government of Qatar, Qatar’s Ambassador wrote to the Committee 
asserting that this extended stay involved only “private citizens.”*>’ However, numerous 
questions regarding this stay remain unanswered. Notably, on a couple of days, the Al Thani stay 
at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., overlapped with a stay by Saudi 
government officials at a time when each government sought to curry then-President Trump’s 
favor in their ongoing dispute. Given the assertions of the Qatari Ambassador, and despite 
significant indications that the Al Thani family stay in fact involved members of Qatar’s royal 
family, out of an abundance of caution, this report does not include the stay at the Trump 
International Hotel by the Al Thani family in the total sum of the emoluments paid by Qatar to 
former President Trump through his businesses. 


Qatar’s Emolument Spending at Trump Properties 


Date Location Expenditure Amount 
January 2018- Trump World Tower The Permanent $133,634>°8 
December 2018 845 United Nations Mission of the State of (2018) 

ian NY) caer tra Poumaied Te 
° Emolument for 4 
Years: 
$465,744 
(2017-2020) 
ESTIMATED EMOLUMENTS PAID BY QATAR $465,744 
(2017-2020) 


Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1220 (Jan. 5, 2018) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of 
Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2019-2020, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1220 (Jan. 5, 2019) (accessed 
Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2020-2021, Borough: Manhattan, 
Block: 1340, Lot: 1220 (Jan. 5, 2020) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final 
Assessment Roll 2021-2022, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1220 (Jan. 5, 2021) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023). 


336 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00028964 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00029461; Congressional Research Service, Qatar: Governance, Security, and U.S. Policy, (Apr. 11, 2022) 
(R44533) (online at https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R44533). 


337 Letter from Meshal Al-Thani, Ambassador of the State of Qatar, to Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, 
Committee on Oversight and Reform (Nov. 22, 2022) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/Embassy%200f%20the™%20State%2 
Oof%20Qatar.22 1122. NARA%20Letter%20re%20Trump%200PO.pdf). 


338 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027357 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027885. 


84 


According to the Congressional Research Service (CRS), in recent decades, Qatar has 
“fostered a close security partnership with the United States.” Qatar hosts the U.S. military’s Al 
Udeid Air Base, which is the “regional headquarters for the U.S. Central Command,” and the 
command post from which the U.S. has overseen air operations in Iraq and other locations.**? 
The U.S. Air Force significantly increased its forces at the base as part of the response to the 
terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, and the government of Qatar has reportedly invested 
billions of dollars to build out the base’s infrastructure.*"° 


In May 2017, while he was in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, for his first overseas trip, then- 
President Trump also met the Emir of Qatar, Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, among other foreign 
leaders.**! Before the meeting with Qatar’s leader, President Trump said, “One of the things that 
we will discuss is the purchase of lots of beautiful military equipment because nobody makes it 
like the United States.”3* 


As previously discussed, in early June 2017, Saudi Arabia and its allies imposed a 
blockade on Qatar.*4? Then-President Trump issued statements that favored the Saudi position in 
the dispute.**4 A few weeks later, the Saudi-led coalition demanded that Qatar meet 13 
conditions within ten days to have the blockade lifted.**° 


According to the New York Times, after Qatar “was besieged by a Middle East embargo 
and President Trump all but accused Qatar of fomenting terror,” the country began a “charm 


339 Congressional Research Service, Qatar: Governance, Security, and U.S. Policy, (Apr. 11, 2022) 
(R44533) (online at https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R44533); Trump Team’s Shifts Jolt Some Allies 
and Soothe Others, New York Times (June 9, 2017) (online at www nytimes.com/2017/06/09/world/middleeast/rex- 
tillerson-calls-for-calm-in-middle-east-standoff-with-qatar html). 


340 Forrest L. Marion, Building USAF ‘Expeditionary Bases’ for Operation ENDURING FREEDOM- 
AFGHANISTAN, 2001-2002, Air Force University Chronicles Online Journal, (Nov. 18, 2005) (online at 
www.airuniversity.af.edu/Portals/10/ASPJ/journals/Chronicles/marion.pdf); US Forces Monitor Mideast Skies at 
Qatar Base Amid World Cup, Air Force Times/The Associated Press (Dec. 2, 2022) (online at 
www.airforcetimes.com/news/yout-air-force/2022/12/02/us-forces-monitor-mideast-skies-at-qatar-base-amid-world- 
cup/). 


341 U.S. Department of State (@StateDept), X (formerly Twitter) (May 21, 2017) (online at 
https://twitter.com/StateDept/status/8662670 18365812736). 


32 Trump Trip: President Meets with Egypt, Qatar, Bahrain, Kuwait, NBC News (May 21, 2017) (online 
at www.nbcnews.com/storyline/trump-s-first-foreign-trip/trump-kicks-day-two-foreign-trip-talks-egypt-qatar- 
bahrain-n762641). 


383 Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Other Arab Nations Cut Diplomatic Ties with Qatar, NPR (June 5, 2017) 
(online at www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/06/05/53 1548717/saudi-arabia-egypt-and-other-arab-nations-cut- 
diplomatic-ties-with-qatar). 


344 Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump), X (formerly Twitter) (June 6, 2017) (online at 
https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/872062 159789985792?s=20); Tweets of June 6, 2017, The American 
Presidency Project, University of California, Santa Barbara (online at www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/tweets- 
june-6-2017); Trump Appears to Take Credit for Gulf Nations’ Move Against Qatar, CNN (June 6, 2017) (online at 
www.cnn.com/2017/06/06/politics/trump-qatar-ideology/index. html). 


345 Qatar Given 10 Days to Meet 13 Sweeping Demands by Saudi Arabia, The Guardian (June 23, 2017) 
(online at www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jun/23/close-al-jazeera-saudi-arabia-issues-qatar-with- | 3-demands-to- 
end-blockade). 


85 


offensive with the Trump administration.”**° This “charm offensive” occurred as Qatar was 
paying the common charges and related expenses on its Trump World Tower units. 


In mid-July 2017, shortly after Saudi Arabia’s blockade of Qatar began, then-Secretary of 
State Tillerson traveled to Qatar. On July 11, 2017, Secretary Tillerson and the Qatari Foreign 
Minister, Mohammed AI Thani, “signed a memorandum of understanding on fighting terrorism.” 
Secretary Tillerson stated, “I think Qatar has been quite clear in its positions and I think very 
reasonable and we want to talk now (about) how do we take things forward.” Secretary Tillerson 
added, “Together, the US and Qatar will do more to track down funding sources, collaborate and 
share information and do more to keep the region and our homeland safe.”**7 


In addition to signing the agreement on the fight against terrorism, Qatar took other steps 
intended to improve its relations with the United States, including agreeing to disclose more 
financial information on its national airline and announcing that it “would upgrade living 
quarters for United States military personnel stationed at al-Udeid Air Base.” It also hired 
numerous lobbyists to represent its interests before the U.S. government.*4® 


In the fall of 2017, then-President Trump publicly expressed support for the actions Qatar 
had taken against terrorism. According to Saudi Arabia and the U.A.E., Qatar’s support for 
terrorism had been a central concern prompting the blockade. On September 20, 2017, then- 
President Trump met with the Emir of Qatar, Sheikh Al Thani, on the sidelines of the United 
Nations (U.N.) General Assembly.**” According to the White House release regarding this 
meeting: 


The President stressed the importance of resolving Qatar’s ongoing dispute with its 
neighbors, restoring unity in the region with partners of the United States, enabling those 
countries to promote regional stability and counter the threat of Iran together. President 
Trump acknowledged the progress displayed by Qatar through the implementation of the 
United States-Qatar bilateral memorandum of understanding on counterterrorism 
cooperation, and stressed the importance of taking additional steps to ensure that the 
commitments made at the Riyadh Summit in Saudi Arabia to cut off funding for 
terrorists, discredit extremist ideology, and defeat terrorist groups come to fruition.*°° 


346 In Charm Offensive, Qatar Pushes for a Comeback in Washington, New York Times (Feb. 9, 2018) 
(online at www.nytimes.com/2018/02/09/us/politics/trump-qatar-lobbying-embargo.html). 


347 US and Qatar Broker Counterterrorism Agreement, CNN (July 11, 2017) (online at 
www.cnn.com/2017/07/1 1/politics/tillerson-qatar-terrorism-memorandum-of-understanding/index.html). 


348 In Charm Offensive, Qatar Pushes for a Comeback in Washington, New York Times (Feb. 9, 2018) 
(online at www.nytimes.com/2018/02/09/us/politics/trump-qatar-lobbying-embargo.html). 


34 Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Other Arab Nations Cut Diplomatic Ties with Qatar, NPR (June 5, 2017) 
(online at www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/06/05/53 1548717/saudi-arabia-egypt-and-other-arab-nations-cut- 
diplomatic-ties-with-qatar); The White House, Press Release: President Trump Meets with Emir Tamim bin Hamad 
Al Thani of Qatar (Sept. 20, 2017) (online at https://trumpwhitehouse. archives. gov/articles/president-trump-meets- 
emir-tamim-bin-hamad-al-thani-qatar/). 


350 The White House: Press Release: President Trump Meets with Emir Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani of 
Qatar (Sept. 20, 2017) (online at https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/articles/president-trump-meets-emir-tamim- 
bin-hamad-al-thani-gatar/). 


86 


On April 10, 2018—three months after the Qataris purchased an additional unit in Trump 
World Tower increasing their total monthly charges and fees due, and after the extended stay by 
the Al Thani family at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C_—then-President 
Trump met the Emir of Qatar at the White House. President Trump again praised Qatar’s record 
on combatting terrorism and referred to the Emir as a “great gentleman.” He continued, ““We 
have a gentleman on my right who buys a lot of equipment from us, a lot of purchases in the 
United States, and a lot of military airplanes missiles—lots of different things, but they’ve been 
great friends in so many different ways.”**! 


Two weeks later, then-Secretary of State Pompeo traveled to Saudi Arabia where he 
reportedly urged his Saudi counterpart to terminate the blockade of Qatar.*°? However, as 
discussed, the blockade remained in effect until January 5, 2021, when “Saudi Arabia, the UAE, 
Bahrain, and Egypt agreed to lift the blockade and restore ties.”>*° 


Emoluments Paid b atar to Trump-Owned Businesses 


Qatar and its ruling family spent heavily at Trump-owned properties during the Trump 
presidency. When Donald Trump was inaugurated, the Qatari Permanent Mission to the United 
Nations owned three units in Trump World Tower at 845 United Nations Plaza. The mission 
purchased one unit in 2004 and the remaining two units in 2012.°°4 On January 17, 2018—after 
President Trump had met with the Emir of Qatar at the U.N. General Assembly in September 
2017 and before he met the Emir again at the White House in April 2018—the Qatari Mission 
bought a fourth unit at Trump World Tower for $6.5 million.*°> Then, as noted, in October 2018, 
Qatar sold a unit in Trump World Tower that incurred a lower monthly base charge than the unit 
it had purchased in January 2018—leaving Qatar with three units that each incurred a monthly 
base charge of $3,180 in 2018.°°° 


351 President Trump Meeting with Emir of Qatar, C-SPAN (Apr. 10, 2018) (online at www.c- 
span.org/video/?443832-1/president-trump-meets-emir-qatar). 


352 Pompeo’s Message to Saudis? Enough is Enough: Stop Qatar Blockade, New York Times (Apr. 28, 
2018) (online at www.nytimes.com/2018/04/28/world/middleeast/mike-pompeo-saudi-arabia-qatar-blockade html). 


353 Congressional Research Service, Qatar: Governance, Security, and U.S. Policy, (Apr. 11, 2022) 
(R44533) (online at https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R44533). 


354 New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2004030501059003 (online at https://a836- 
acris nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2004030501059003) (accessed Aug. 23, 2023); 
New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2018100500569001 (online at https://a836- 
acris nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2018100500569001) (accessed Aug. 23, 2023); 
New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2012112901543003 (online at https://a836- 
acris nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2012112901543003) (accessed Aug. 23, 2023); 
New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2012112901543003 (online at https://a836- 
acris nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2012112901543003) (accessed Aug. 23, 2023); 
New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2012120301328001 (online at https://a836- 
acris nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2012120301328001) (accessed Aug. 23, 2023). 


355 Trump Set to Benefit as Qatar Buys $6.5m Apartment in New York Tower, The Guardian (May 4, 2018) 
(online at www.theguardian.com/us-news/2018/may/04/trump-qatar-buys-apartment-new-york-tower). 


356 New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2018100500569001 (online at https://a836- 
acris nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2018100500569001) (accessed Aug. 23, 2023). 


87 


Records provided to the Committee by Mazars show that, in January 2018, prior to 
Qatar’s purchase of the fourth unit, Qatar had paid $8,592 in base charges for the three properties 
it owned. From February 2018 through the sale in October 2018, Qatar paid $11,773 monthly in 
base charges for its four units in Trump World Tower. Following Qatar’s sale of its unit in 
October 2018, the country paid $9,540 per month in base charges to Trump World Tower for the 
remainder of 2018. 


In 2018—the only year for which Mazars provided records for Trump World Tower— 
Qatar incurred monthly base charges totaling $133,634.°°’ Assuming that these charges did not 
change during the four years of the Trump presidency, the Qatari-owned properties would have 
accrued a total of $465,744 in base charges after accounting for Qatar’s property purchase and 
sale. Of note, the properties also incurred additional charges above the monthly base charges— 
including utilities, special assessments, and maintenance fees—in 2018 totaling $20,767.>°8 


While a Qatari representative stated regarding the January 2018 purchase that, “[t]hese 
apartments, plus the recent unit, were all purchased due to their location, nothing more,” the 
timing of the purchase in relation to Qatari policy objectives, and the sale of a previously 
purchased apartment that had been less costly for the Qatari government, raise numerous 
questions regarding the true motivations behind these actions.*°? 


One week after purchasing the new Trump World Tower unit, on January 24, 2018, an 
unknown individual(s) identified by the name “Al Thani’”—the name of the Qatari royal 
family—booked multiple rooms at Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., through 
March 9, 2018. The Al Thani family reportedly dominates Qatari government ministries and 
receives a significant share of state revenue.*™ It is unclear from the Mazars records who stayed 
in the hotel in the rooms booked under the Al Thani name during this period. Though the rooms 
were booked at times under the name “Al-Thani, Khalid,” several prominent members of the 
family appear to have this name. All charges for “Al-Thani, Khalid” appear to have ultimately 
been refunded, and then, subsequently, amounts equal to those refunded were later charged to an 
account labeled “Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay.” The charges incurred by the Al Thani 
family total more than $283,000.°°' A page from the records provided to the Committee by 
Mazars showing charges associated with this “Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay” appears 
below.°” 


357 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027357 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027885. Of note, in some instances, the Trump World Tower Condominium Status Report refers to “Quatar.” 


358 Id. 


359 Trump Set to Benefit as Qatar Buys $6.5m Apartment in New York Tower, The Guardian (May 4, 2018) 
(online at www.theguardian.com/us-news/2018/may/04/trump-qatar-buys-apartment-new-york-tower). 


369 Harvard Divinity School, A/-Thani Family (online at https://rpl.hds harvard.edu/faq/al-thani-family) 
(accessed Nov. 1, 2023). 


361 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00028964 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00029461. 


362 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00029021. 


88 


Guest Ledger - Charges 

Guest Name Room Status Transaction Type 
Account Room Type Folio Transaction Code 
101000 - Room Charge 

Date: 02/01/2018 


Created By Time Amount 


62865780-1 DIK GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 15:23 280.00 
5089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 15:23 280.00 
5089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 15:23 280.00 
5089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 15.23 280.00 
5089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 15:23 280.00 
5089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 15:23 280.00 
5089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 15:23 280.00 
5089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 1523 280.00 
5089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 16:25 280.00 
5089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 16:25 280.00 
5089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 15:25 280.00 
5089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 15:25 280.00 
§089279 GUEST 107000 
Sheikh Ai Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 15:25 280.00 
5089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 15:25 280.00 
6089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 16:25 280.00 
5089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 18:25 280.00 
5089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 15:27 3,500.00 
5089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 18:27 3,500.00 
5089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 15:27 3,500.00 
5089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 15:27 3,500.00 
5089279 GUEST 101000 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay Active ROOM 15:27 3,500.00 
5089279 GUEST 107000 


As noted, in a letter dated November 14, 2022, then-Committee Chairwoman Maloney 
wrote to NARA “to request presidential records [...] to determine whether former President 
Trump distorted U.S. foreign policy to serve his own financial interests at the expense of the 
American people and in violation of his oath of office.” In that letter, then-Chairwoman 
Maloney explained that the records provided to the Committee from Mazars showed that the 
Sheikh Al Thani Family had booked an extended stay at the Trump International Hotel in 
Washington, D.C.; she identified the expenditures associated with this stay as expenditures by 
“the Qatari government.”° 


In a letter dated November 22, 2022, the Ambassador of the State of Qatar, Meshal Al- 
Thani, responded to then-Chairwoman Maloney: “I have investigated this matter and confirmed 
that no representative of the Embassy of Qatar, and no other government official of the State of 
Qatar, was a guest at the Trump International Hotel during the time periods described in your 
letter.” The Ambassador added, “With respect to the guest ledger excerpted in your letter which 
refers to the ‘Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay,’ I can further confirm that these guests are 


36 Letter from Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Ms. Debra 
Steidel Wall, Acting Archivist of the United States, National Archives and Records Administration (Nov. 14, 2022) 
(online at https://oversightdemocrats house. gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/2022-1 1- 
14.CBM%20to%20Steidel%20Wall-NARA%20re%20Mazars%20Docs.pdf). 


364 Td. 


89 


private citizens who were not engaged in any government business.” The Ambassador did not 
identify the private citizens who booked the stays identified in the ledgers provided by Mazars to 
the Committee, nor did he provide the basis for his statement that private citizens were 
responsible for these stays. He also did not explain whether these individuals were members of 
the Qatari royal family.°® 


Regardless of whether the stay labeled as the Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay 
involved only private citizens, it would be reasonable to infer that the booking of a prolonged 
hotel stay—which ultimately yielded hundreds of thousands of dollars in payments to a Trump- 
owned business—using the name of the Qatari royal family was intended to signal to The Trump 
Organization and to then-President Trump the country’s financial support of the President’s 
business at a time when Qatar was seeking then-President Trump’s support in a conflict that 
constituted a crisis to Qatar. This is one more expenditure highlighting how then-President 
Trump’s continued ownership of private businesses created a magnet for foreign countries 
seeking to influence the foreign policy of the United States through payments to the President 
and his businesses. This is precisely the kind of self-dealing that the U.S. Constitution seeks to 
prevent by prohibiting a President from receiving emoluments “of any kind whatever” from 
foreign governments absent congressional consent. However, despite numerous indications that 
this expensive stay involved members of Qatar’s royal family, given the Ambassador’s 
representations to the Committee, this report does not include the expenditures at the Trump 
International Hotel by the Sheikh Al Thani Family among the total emoluments paid by Qatar to 
Trump-owned businesses. 


It is notable that on a couple of days, the Sheikh al Thani family’s stay at the Trump 
International Hotel in Washington, D.C., overlapped with a stay by officials from the “Royal 
Saudi Embassy — Misnitry [sic] of Defence.” If the stay by the Sheikh Al Thani family at the 
Trump International Hotel involved any government officials—or members of the royal family— 
then the Trump International Hotel would have been simultaneously receiving emoluments from 
both Qatar and Saudi Arabia—two countries that were in conflict and that were both seeking to 
curry then-President Trump’s support. Further, both stays occurred shortly before leaders from 
each of Qatar and Saudi Arabia met separately with then-President Trump at the White House. 
Below is a single page from the Trump International Hotel Guest Ledger for March 9, 2018, 
showing rooms booked to both the “Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay” and the “Royal 
Saudi Embassy — Misnitry [sic] of Defence Delegation” on the same day.* 


365 T etter from Meshal Al-Thani, Ambassador of the State of Qatar, to Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, 
Committee on Oversight and Reform (Nov. 22, 2022) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/Embassy%200f%20the™%20State%2 
Oof%20Qatar.22 1122. NARA%20Letter%20re%20Trump%200PO.pdf). 


366 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE 00029268. 


90 


Guest Ledger - Charges 
Guest Name 

Account 

101000 - Room Charge 
Date: 03/09/2018 


Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay 
5089279 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay 
5089279 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay 
5089279 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay 
5089279 
Sheikh Al Thani Family Extended Stay 
6089278 


Royal Saudi Embassy - Misnitry of Defence 
Delegation 
5504680 


Royal Saudi Embassy - Misnitry of Defence 
Delegation 


Potential Conflicts Relating to Jared Kushner and the Kushner Companies 


On February 11 and February 12, 2018, during the extended stay at the Trump 
International Hotel in Washington, D.C., under the Al Thani family name, a room at the hotel 


Room 
Room Type 


Status 
Folio 


In-house 
GUEST 
In-house 
FOLIO6 
In-house 
GUEST 
Active 
GUEST 
Active 
GUEST 
Active 
GUEST 
Active 
FOLIO4 
Active 
GUESI 
Active 
GUEST 
Active 
FOLIO4 
Active 
GUEST 
Active 
GUEST 
Active 
GUEST 
Active 
GUEST 
Active 
GUEST 
Active 
GUEST 
Active 
GUEST 
Active 
GUEST 
Active 
GUEST 
Active 
GUEST 


Active 
GUEST 


Transaction Type 
Transaction Code 


ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 
ROOM 
101000 


ROOM 
101000 


Created By 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


DATABRIDGEINTERNALUSER 


Time 


Amount 


3,500.00 


4,500.00 


280.00 


280.00 


490,00 


895.00 


495,00 


was booked under the name “Ivanka & Jared Kushner.”*°’ Shortly thereafter, on February 14, 


2018, Jared Kushner’s father, Charles Kushner, contacted Brookfield Asset Management—a 
company in which Qatar has invested significant funds—seeking a bailout for his financially 
troubled property at 666 Fifth Avenue in New York. Two months later, President Trump met 


with the Emir of Qatar at the White House. The Kushner Companies and Brookfield finalized a 
deal in August 2018 in which Brookfield Asset Management leased 666 Fifth Avenue and paid 


99 years of rent—totaling approximately $1.1 billion—in advance. 


367 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00029068; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 


00029080. 


368 


368 Deal Gives Kushners Cash Infusion on 666 Fifth Avenue, New York Times (Aug. 3, 2018) (online at 


www nytimes.com/2018/08/03/nyregion/kushners-building-fifth-avenue-brookfield-lease html); Letter from 


Chairman Ron Wyden, Senate Committee on Finance, and Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House Committee on 


Oversight and Reform, to Secretary Lloyd J. Austin, III, Department of Defense (Dec. 6, 2022) (online at 


https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/2022-12- 
06.CBM%20Wyden%20to%20Austin-DOD%20re%20Kushner%20Conflict%200f%20Interest%20%28 1%29.pdf). 


91 


Just as he did with Saudi Arabia, former Senior Advisor Jared Kushner cultivated highly 
lucrative business ties with Qatar after President Trump left office. After leaving the White 
House in 2021, Mr. Kushner embarked on a tour of Persian Gulf states, including Qatar and the 
U.A.E., to pitch those countries’ sovereign wealth funds on investing in his private equity fund. 
Initially, Qatari officials reportedly declined to invest based on its view of Mr. Kushner as an 
opponent during the Trump Administration, but they also feared retaliation if they rejected Mr. 
Kushner’s solicitation to invest in the event that Mr. Trump returned to power.*°® According to 
reports, a Qatari sovereign wealth fund ultimately agreed to invest $200 million in Mr. Kushner’s 
fund.°”° 


3© Seeking Backers for New Fund, Jared Kushner Turns to Middle East, New York Times (Nov. 26, 2021) 
(online at www.nytimes.com/202 1/1 1/26/us/politics/kushner-investment-middle-east html). 


370 Kushner Firm Got Hundreds of Millions from 2 Persian Gulf Nations, New York Times (Mar. 30, 2023) 
(online at www.nytimes.com/2023/03/30/us/politics/jared-kushner-qatar-united-arab-emirates.html); Letter from 
Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Secretary Lloyd J. Austin III, 
Department of Defense (Dec. 6, 2022) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/2022-12- 
06.CBM%20Wyden%20to%20Austin-DOD%20re%20Kushner%20Conflict%200f%20Interest%20%28 1%29.pdf); 
Letter from Ranking Member Jamie Raskin, Committee on Oversight and Accountability, to Jared Kushner, 
Founder and Chief Executive Officer, A Fin Management LLC (Feb. 15, 2023) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.govw/files/2023-02- 
15.%20JBR%20to%20Kushner%20re%20Saudi%20Arabia.fnl_.pdf); Letter from Ranking Member Jamie Raskin to 
Chairman James Comer, Committee on Oversight and Accountability (Aug. 31, 2023) (online at 
https://oversightdemocrats.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight house.gov/files/2023-08- 
31.JBR%20to%20Comer™20re%20Kushner%20Subpoena.pdf). 


92 


UNITED ARAB EMIRATES 


According to the records provided to the Committee by Mazars, on four occasions 
between October 2017 and May 2018, the government of the United Arab Emirates (U.A.E.) 
booked rooms at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., at a cost of $65,225.°7! 


The first U.A.E. stay occurred in October 2017, just days after Mr. Elliott Broidy, a 
former Trump fundraiser who would later plead guilty to violating the Foreign Agents 
Registration Act (FARA), reportedly had personally appealed to then-President Trump on 
October 6, 2017, on behalf of the U.A.E.°” In addition to other issues of concern to the country, 
Broidy reportedly urged President Trump to fire then-Secretary of State Tillerson, who had 
pressed Saudi Arabia and the U.A.E. to ease their blockade of Qatar.*7* Mr. Broidy himself had 
stayed at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., from October 1, 2017, through 
October 6, 2017—one of his many stays at the hotel.” President Trump pardoned Mr. Broidy 
shortly before leaving office.*”° 


Additional U.A.E. stays occurred in November 2017, March 2018, and May 2018. The 
U.A.E. delegation’s stay at the Trump International Hotel in March 2018 overlapped with a stay 
by a delegation from Saudi Arabia, a close ally of the U.A.E. Delegations of both countries were 
staying at the hotel on March 13, 2018, the day on which then-President Trump made public his 
decision to fire Secretary of State Tillerson.*”° 


371 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT-COMMITTEE-00018630; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018642; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018649; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE- 
00018805; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_ COMMITTEE-00018806; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE- 
00014770; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008096 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00008119; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008 120. 


3” How 2 Gulf Monarchies Sought to Influence the White House, New York Times (Mar. 21, 2018) (online 
at www.nytimes.com/2018/03/2 1/us/politics/george-nader-elliott-broidy-uae-saudi-arabia-white-house- 
influence.html). 


373 Saudi Arabia Planned to Invade Qatar Last Summer. Rex Tillerson’s Efforts to Stop It May Have Cost 
Him His Job, The Intercept (Aug. 1, 2018) (online at https://theintercept.com/2018/08/0 1/rex-tillerson-qatar-saudi- 
uae/); Trump Seems to Undercut Tillerson’s Remarks on Qatar, Washington Post (June 9, 2017) (online at 
www.washingtonpost.com/world/arab-countries-place-dozens-on-new-qatar-terror-list-deepening- 
dispute/2017/06/09/fd727 fab-e750-4 fdd-ac23-26256e8e0493_ story html). 


374 Emails Show UAE-Linked Effort Against Tillerson, BBC News (Mar. 5, 2018) (online at 
www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-4328 1519); MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018457; MAZARS- 
OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018466; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018478; MAZARS- 
OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018487; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018494; MAZARS- 
OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018501. 


375 With Hours Left in Office, Trump Grants Clemency to Bannon and Other Allies, New York Times (May 
5, 2021) (online at www.nytimes.com/2021/01/20/us/politics/trump-pardons html). 


376 Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump), X (formerly Twitter) (Mar. 13, 2018) (online at 
https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/9735403 16656623616). 


93 


U.A.E.’s Emolument Spending at Trump Properties 


Date Location Expenditures Amount 
October 21-23, 2017 | Trump International Hotel | “Embassy, United Arab $2,625°”” 
(Washington, D.C.) Emirates” hotel stay 
November 10, 2017 | Trump International Hotel “E-United Arab $33,512°”8 
(Washington, D.C.) Emirates” hotel stay (37 
rooms) 
March 8-16, 2018 Trump International Hotel “Embassy of the UAE $26,168°” 
(Washington, D.C.) Military Delegation” 
hotel stay 
May 1-3, 2018 Trump International Hotel “Embassy of the UAE $2,920°*° 
(Washington, D.C.) Military Delegation— 
May” hotel stay 
EMOLUMENTS PAID BY U.A.E. $65,225 
(2017-2018) 


The U.A.E. “is a federation of seven principalities or ‘emirates,’” including Abu Dhabi 
(the capital) and Dubai (a commercial center). Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan 
(commonly known as M.B.Z.), the Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi, has “effectively been ruling the 
Emirates since 2014.”°°! 


U.A.E. and Saudi Arabia have maintained “closely aligned” foreign policies. The two 
countries have “cooperated on various regional endeavors, such as the blockade of Qatar (2017— 
2021), the ongoing war in Yemen (2015—present), and support to counter Muslim Brotherhood 
and Islamist-affiliated movements.”>*” 


377 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT-COMMITTEE-00018630; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018642; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018649. 


378 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018805; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018806; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00014770. 


377 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008096 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00008119. 


380 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008120. 


381 Congressional Research Service, The United Arab Emirates (UAE): Issues for U.S. Policy (Jan. 30, 
2023) (online at www.crs.gov/Reports/RS21852); Embassy of the United Arab Emirates, About UAE President 
Sheikh Mohamed Bin Zayed (accessed Nov. 1, 2023) (online at www.uae-embassy.org/discover- 
uae/governance/about-uae-president-sheikh-mohamed-bin-zayed); Mohammed bin Zayed, an Ambitious U.S. 
Partner, Rises to Lead the U.A.E., New York Times (May 16, 2022) (online at 
www nytimes.com/2022/05/14/world/middleeast/mohammed-bin-zayed-elected-uae-leader.html). 


382 Congressional Research Service, The United Arab Emirates (UAE): Issues for U.S. Policy (Jan. 30, 
2023) (online at www.crs.gov/Reports/RS21852). 


94 


U.A.E. Cultivation of Trump Administration and Qatar Blockade 


According to the New York Times, M.B.Z. “worked assiduously before the presidential 
election to crack Mr. Trump’s inner circle, and secured a secret meeting during the transition 
period with the president’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner.”? 


Then-President Trump met with M.B.Z. at the White House on May 15, 2017. During an 
Oval Office photo opportunity, President Trump said that M.B.Z. was a “very special person, 
highly respected” and noted, “I think [he] loves the United States, which to us is very 
important.”*** This visit occurred less than a week before President Trump traveled to Saudi 
Arabia for the first overseas trip of his presidency.** 


As discussed previously, in early June 2017, U.A.E. joined Saudi Arabia and other allied 
nations in blockading Qatar.**° On June 8, 2017, then-Secretary of State Tillerson stated, “The 
emir of Qatar has made progress in halting financial support and expelling terrorist elements 
from his country, but he must do more and he must do it more quickly.” Secretary Tillerson 
called on the U.A.E., Saudi Arabia, and their regional allies to “ease the blockade against Qatar.” 
That same day, however, then-President Trump took a harsher stance than his Secretary of State, 
stating: “The nation of Qatar unfortunately has historically been a funder of terrorism at a very 
high level.”38’ The Ambassador of the U.A.E. to the United States commented approvingly: 
“The UAE welcomes President Trump’s leadership in challenging Qatar’s troubling support for 
extremism. The next step is for Qatar to acknowledge these concerns and commit to re-examine 
its regional policies.”*** 


On March 13, 2018, then-President Trump made public his decision to fire Secretary 
Tillerson by tweeting that “Mike Pompeo, Director of the CIA, will become our new Secretary of 
State.”°°° The New York Times called Tillerson’s dismissal the end of “a rocky tenure for a 
former oil executive who never meshed with the president,” and noted that Secretary Tillerson 
repeatedly disagreed with the White House and “broke publicly with Mr. Trump on issues 


383 The Most Powerful Arab Ruler Isn’t M.B.S. It’s M.B.Z., New York Times (June 2, 2019) (online at 
www nytimes.com/2019/06/02/world/middleeast/crown-prince-mohammed-bin-zayed html). 


384 Trump Meets with Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi as He Looks to Muslim World, USA Today (May 15, 
2017) (online at www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2017/05/15/trump-meets-crown-prince-abu-dhabi-he-looks- 
muslim-world/101721138/). 


385 Saudis Welcome Trump’s Rebuff of Obama’s Mideast Views, New York Times (May 20, 2017) (online 
at www.nytimes.com/2017/05/20/world/middleeast/donald-trump-saudi-arabia.html). 


386 Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Other Arab Nations Cut Diplomatic Ties with Qatar, NPR (June 5, 2017) 
(online at www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/06/05/53 1548717/saudi-arabia-egypt-and-other-arab-nations-cut- 
diplomatic-ties-with-qatar). 


387 Trump Scolds Qatar as Tillerson Seeks to Ease Crisis, Reuters (June 8, 2017) (online at 
www reuters.com/article/us-gulf-qatar-sanctions/trump-scolds-qatar-as-tillerson-seeks-to-ease-crisis- 
idUSKBN18Z2ZU). 


388 Gulf Crisis: Trump Escalates Row by Accusing Qatar of Sponsoring Terror, The Guardian (June 9, 
2017) (online at www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jun/09/trump-qatar-sponsor-terrorism-middle-east). 


389 Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump), X (formerly Twitter) (Mar. 13, 2018) (online at 
https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/9735403 16656623616). 


95 


ranging from the dispute between Saudi Arabia and Qatar to the American response to Russia’s 
cyber aggression.”?”° 


During the Trump Administration, the U.A.E. reportedly continued “to exploit the 
vulnerabilities in American governance, including its reliance on campaign contributions, 
susceptibility to powerful lobbying firms and lax enforcement of disclosure laws” in order “‘to 
steer U.S. foreign policy in ways favorable to the Arab autocracy.”*?! These efforts were so 
concerning to the U.S. intelligence community that U.S. agencies reportedly compiled a 
classified report detailing the U.A.E. government’s systematic efforts to manipulate U.S. foreign 
policy in its favor.>” 


The U.A.E. reportedly engaged George Nader—a businessman, informal adviser to 
President Trump, and “mediator and back-channel diplomat in Middle Eastern affairs”—to help 
the country influence U.S. foreign policy.*? According to Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s 
report into foreign interference in the 2016 election, Mr. Nader worked for the U.A.E. as an 
advisor to M.B.Z.°** According to the New York Times, “Mr. Nader also held himself out as 
intermediary for Saudi Arabia’s crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman.”??> The New York Times 
reported: 


Mr. Nader, 58, made frequent trips to the White House during the early months of the 
Trump administration, meeting with Stephen K. Bannon and Jared Kushner to discuss 
American policy toward the Persian Gulf states in advance of Mr. Trump’s trip to Saudi 
Arabia in May 2017, according to people familiar with the meetings.*”° 


During the early days of the Trump Administration, Mr. Nader reportedly connected Mr. 
Broidy with M.B.Z., and eventually, Mr. Broidy’s company entered into contracts with the 
U.A.E. worth several hundred million dollars.*?’ Mr. Broidy took numerous actions intended to 
advance the U.A.E.’s policy objectives—and oppose Qatar’s interests—such as lobbying 


3°0 Trump Fires Rex Tillerson and Will Replace Him with C.I.A. Chief Pompeo, New York Times (Mar. 13, 
2018) (online at www.nytimes.com/2018/03/13/us/politics/trump-tillerson-pompeo.html). 


3°! U.S. Intelligence Report Says Key Gulf Ally Meddled in American Politics, Washington Post (Nov. 12, 
2022) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2022/11/12/uae-meddled-us-politics-intel-report/). 


392 Td. 


3°3 George Nader, One of the Trump-Russia Investigation’s Most Mysterious Figures, Explained, Vox 
(Mar. 28, 2018) (online at www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2018/3/28/17165410/george-nader-trump-mueller- 
immunity-russia). 

3°4 Special Counsel Robert S. Mueller, III, Report on The Investigation into Russian Interference in the 
2016 Presidential Election (Mar. 2019) (online at www.justice.gov/archives/sco/file/13738 16/download). 


3° How 2 Gulf Monarchies Sought to Influence the White House, New York Times (Mar. 21, 2018) (online 
at www.nytimes.com/2018/03/2 1 /us/politics/george-nader-elliott-broidy-uae-saudi-arabia-white-house- 
influence.html). 


3% Mueller’s Focus on Adviser to Emirates Suggests Broader Investigation, New York Times (Mar. 3, 
2018) (online at www.nytimes.com/2018/03/03/us/politics/george-nader-mueller-investigation-united-arab- 
emirates html). 


397 Td. 


96 


Members of Congress and “persuad[ing] an American think tank, Foundation for Defense of 
Democracies, to stage an anti-Qatar conference,” among other actions. *?* 


Public reporting also indicates that Mr. Broidy met with then-President Trump at the 
White House on October 6, 2017. According to the New York Times, in advance of Mr. Broidy’s 
meeting with President Trump, Mr. Nader conveyed to Mr. Broidy the policy positions the 
U.A.E. wanted him to advocate.*”” 


After meeting with then-President Trump, Mr. Broidy reported back to Mr. Nader 
“recounting his advocacy on the U.A.E.’s behalf during the meeting with Mr. Trump in the Oval 
Office amid an afternoon of stops throughout the White House.”*° In addition to raising other 
issues of priority to the U.A.E., Mr. Broidy reportedly “lobbied the president to meet privately 
‘in an informal setting’ with the Emirates’ military commander and de facto ruler, Crown Prince 
Mohammed bin Zayed al-Nahyan; to back the U.A.E.’s hawkish policies in the region; and to 
fire Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson.”*”! 


In 2019, the DOJ indicted Mr. Nader, Mr. Ahmad “Andy” Khawaja, and other co- 
conspirators for illegally funneling Emirati money to the inaugural committee of President-elect 
Trump, among other political action committees and party organizations, as well as to the 
presidential campaign of Hillary Clinton prior to Mr. Trump’s electoral victory.” Mr. Nader, 
who was already serving a sentence for a prior conviction, was given “an additional year and 
eight months in prison for his role in funneling at least $3.5 million in unlawful contributions 
from the United Arab Emirates (UAE) to unwitting political committees in the United States.”*” 


In October 2020, Elliott Broidy pled guilty to acting as an unregistered foreign agent for 
Malaysian interests. Mr. Broidy also admitted to lobbying the U.S. government “‘to deport a 


3°8 The Princes, the President and the Fortune Seekers, Associated Press (May 21, 2018) (online at 
https://apnews.com/article/a352 1859cf8d4c199cb9a8567abd2b71). 


3° How 2 Gulf Monarchies Sought to Influence the White House, New York Times (Mar. 21, 2018) (online 
at www.nytimes.com/2018/03/2 1/us/politics/george-nader-elliott-broidy-uae-saudi-arabia-white-house- 
influence.html). 


400 Mueller’s Focus on Adviser to Emirates Suggests Broader Investigation, New York Times (Mar. 3, 
2018) (online at www.nytimes.com/2018/03/03/us/politics/george-nader-mueller-investigation-united-arab- 
emirates html). 


401 Td. 


42 United States v. Khawaja, et al., No. 1:19-cr-374 (D.D.C.) (online at 
https://cdn.cnn.com/cnn/2019/images/12/04/khawaja.et.al_indictment_unsealed.12.3.19.pdf); Indictment Details 
How Emirates Sought Influence in 2016 Campaign, New Y ork Times (Dec. 5, 2019) (online at 
www nytimes.com/2019/12/05/us/politics/indictment-uae-influence.html). 


403 Department of Justice, Press Release: Man Pleads Guilty to Child Exploitation Crimes (Jan. 13, 2020) 
(online at www.justice.gov/usao-edva/pr/man-pleads-guilty-child-exploitation-crimes); Mueller Probe Witness Gets 
10-year Sentence on Child Porn, Abuse Charges, Politico (June 26, 2020) (online at 
www.politico.com/news/2020/06/26/george-nader-mueller-probe-sentence-34 1624); Department of Justice, Press 
Release: Businessman Sentenced for $3.5M Foreign Conduit Contribution Scheme (July 18, 2023) (online at 
www.justice.gov/opa/pr/businessman-sentenced-3 5m-foreign-conduit-contribution-scheme). 


97 


critic of the Chinese Communist Party.”4°* President Trump pardoned Mr. Broidy for these 
offenses shortly before leaving office.*° 


Emoluments Paid by U.A.E. to Trump-Owned Businesses 


As noted above, the U.A.E. spent more than $65,000 on stays at the Trump International 
Hotel in Washington, D.C., from October 2017 through May 2018. On the nights of October 21 
to October 23, 2017, the Embassy of the U.A.E. paid $2,625 for rooms rented at the hotel.*”° 
This was the first of four stays by the Embassy of the U.A.E. recorded in the documents 
produced by Mazars to the Committee. 


The guest ledger for the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., shows that on 
the night of November 10, 2017, the “E[mbassy of the]-United Arab Emirates” rented 37 rooms. 
According to the hotel ledger dated July 29, 2018, its organization account for the night of 
November 10, 2017, was marked “Closed” with total charges of $33,512.4°’ 


In March 2018, an “Embassy of the UAE Military Delegation” rented 11 rooms at the 
Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., paying $26,168. The bill for this stay states that 
the delegation arrived on March 8, 2018, and departed on March 16, 2018 (with some food and 
beverage charges incurred on March 17 and additional charges apparently applied to the bill after 
that date). However, based on the records, charges do not appear to have begun accruing until 
March 10, 2018.4°8 Notably, both the U.A.E. and Saudi delegations were staying at the Trump 
International Hotel in Washington, D.C., the day that Secretary of State Tillerson was fired. 


Officials from the Embassy of the U.A.E. stayed at the Trump International Hotel in 
Washington, D.C., again in May 2018, paying $2,920.4° 


404 Elliott Broidy Pleads Guilty in Foreign Lobbying Case, New York Times (Oct. 20, 2020) (online at 
www nytimes.com/2020/10/20/us/politics/elliott-broidy-foreign-lobbying.html); Department of Justice, Press 
Release: Elliott Broidy Pleads Guilty for Back-Channel Lobbying Campaign to Drop IMDB Investigation and 
Remove a Chinese Foreign National (Oct. 20, 2020) (online at www.justice.gov/opa/pr/elliott-broidy-pleads-guilty- 
back-channel-lobbying-campaign-drop-1mdb-investigation-and). 

405 With Hours Left in Office, Trump Grants Clemency to Bannon and Other Allies, New York Times (May 
5, 2021) (online at www.nytimes.com/2021/01/20/us/politics/trump-pardons html). 


406 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT-COMMITTEE-00018630; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018642; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018649. 


407 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018805; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018806; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00014770. 


408 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008096 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00008119. 


409 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008120. The bill states that the arrival date was May 1, 
2018, and the departure date was May 31, 2018; however, charges were incurred only on May 1, May 2, and May 3, 
2018, by four individuals. 


98 


Lobbyist Spending 


Elliott Broidy, who would later plead guilty to violating FARA, stayed at the Trump 
International Hotel in Washington, D.C., on October 6, 2017—the same day he reportedly 
lobbied President Trump on behalf of the U.A.E.*!° For his stay that night and the five preceding 
nights, he spent at least $2,970.*!! From October 22 to 24, 2017, Mr. Broidy stayed at the Trump 
International Hotel in Washington, D.C., spending at least $2,820 during that period.*'” This stay 
partially overlapped with a stay by the U.A.E. Embassy.*!? It is unclear whether Mr. Broidy 
stayed at the hotel as part of lobbying efforts on behalf of the U.A.E. or whether his stays were 
paid for by the U.A.E. As a result, these sums are not included in the emolument totals in this 
report. 


Trump Business Interests in U.A.E. 


Former President Trump has had extensive business interests in Dubai for many years. 
According to the New York Times, in 2013 and again in 2014, Trump agreed to work with 
Hussain Sajwani, a developer who was reportedly known as the “Donald of Dubai,” to develop 
two golf courses.*!* In February 2017, shortly after Donald Trump took office, both Donald 
Trump Jr. and Eric Trump attended the opening of one of those golf courses.*! 


On May 16, 2017—1ust one day before then-President Trump met with M.B.Z—Donald 
Trump Jr. appears to have met with Mr. Sajwani in the U.A.E.*'© On August 5, 2017, The Trump 
Organization tweeted “the launch of The Trump Estates Park Residences, a collection luxury 
villas [sic] with exclusive access to @TrumpGolfDubai.’’*!” This venture was undertaken by The 


410 Department of Justice, Press Release: Elliott Broidy Pleads Guilty for Back-Channel Lobbying 
Campaign to Drop [MDB Investigation and Remove a Chinese Foreign National (Oct. 20, 2020) (online at 
www.justice.gov/opa/pr/elliott-broidy-pleads-guilty-back-channel-lobbying-campaign-drop- 1 mdb-investigation- 
and). 


411 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018457; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018466; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_ COMMITTEE-00018478; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE- 
00018487; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE-00018494; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE- 
00018501. 


412, MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018642; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018643; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_ COMMITTEE-00018649; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE- 
00018657. 


413, MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018642; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018649. 


414 Trump’s Business Ties in the Gulf Raise Questions About His Allegiances, New York Times (June 17, 
2017) (online at www.nytimes.com/2017/06/17/world/middleeast/trumps-business-ties-in-persian-gulf-raise- 
questions-about-his-allegiances.html). 


415 Trump Sons Open Dubai Golf Club as Namesake Now US President, Seattle Times (Feb. 18, 2017) 
(online at www.seattletimes.com/business/trumps-sons-eric-and-donald-jr-in-dubai-to-open-golf-club/). 


416 Trump’s Business Ties in the Gulf Raise Questions About His Allegiances, New York Times (June 17, 
2017) (online at www.nytimes.com/2017/06/17/world/middleeast/trumps-business-ties-in-persian-gulf-raise- 
questions-about-his-allegiances.html); Hussain Sajwani, Instagram (May 16, 2017) (online at 
www. instagram.com/p/BUJwB2HInMB/). 


417 The Trump Organization (@Trump), X (formerly Twitter) (Aug. 5, 2017) (online at 
99 


Trump Organization in partnership with Hussain Sajwani’s DAMAC firm.*!® President Trump’s 
ethics disclosure covering his finances for 2017 show that he claimed $141,433 in income from 
“DT DUBAI GOLF MANAGER LLC,” an entity through which former President Trump 
conducted business for the Trump International Golf Club, Dubai.*!? The company generated 
even more income for then-President Trump during the rest of his time in office. He reported 
earning over $300,000 in income from the company in 2018 and 2019, and $458,000 from it in 
2020.40 


The Trump family’s significant business activities in the U.A.E. during Mr. Trump’s 
presidency raise the persistent question of whether he conducted American foreign policy in the 
Middle East to further his business interests rather than U.S. interests. 


U.A.E. Investment in Kushner Fund 


Shortly after leaving the White House, during his 2021 fundraising tour of Gulf States for 
his private equity firm, Affinity Partners, Jared Kushner solicited an investment from the U.A.E. 
Despite reported concerns by Emirati rulers about Mr. Kushner’s lack of business experience, an 
Emirati fund ultimately agreed to invest $200 million in the fund.*”! 


https://twitter.com/trump/status/893841 118328172544). 


418 Trump’s Interests vs. America’s, Dubai Edition, The Atlantic (Aug. 9, 2017) (online at 
www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2017/08/donald-trump-conflicts-of-interests/508382/). 


419 Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 
278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed May 15, 2018) (online at https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/2 1 154685/trump- 
oge-2018.pdf); ProPublica, Trump ’s 10 Troubling Deals with Foreign Power-Players (Jan. 19, 2017) (online at 
https://projects.propublica.org/trump-conflicts/); DAMAC Properties, Press Release: DAMAC Properties to 
Develop Championship Trump International Golf Course in Dubai (May 5, 2013) (accessed via Nexis). 


#20 Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 
278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed May 15, 2018) (online at https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/2 1 154685/trump- 
oge-2018.pdf); Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 
278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed May 15, 2019) (online at https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/2 1 154683/trump- 
oge-2019.pdf); Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 
278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed July 31, 2020) (online at 
https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/7012257/President-Donald-Trump-2020-financial-disclosure.pdf); Office 
of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 278e) (Donald J. 
Trump) (Filed Jan. 15, 2021) (online at 
https://extapps2.oge.gov/201/Presiden nsf/PAS+Index/6E78B 163F8 16EF6A852586630075291D/$FILE/Trump,%2 
ODonald%20J.%202021Termination%20278.pdf); ProPublica, Trump’s 10 Troubling Deals with Foreign Power- 
Players (Jan. 19, 2017) (online at https://projects.propublica.org/trump-conflicts/); DAMAC Properties, Press 
Release: DAMAC Properties to Develop Championship Trump International Golf Course in Dubai (May 5, 2013) 
(accessed via Nexis). 


#1 Kushner Firm Got Hundreds of Millions From 2 Persian Gulf Nations, New York Times (Mar. 30, 
2023) (online at www.nytimes.com/2023/03/30/us/politics/jared-kushner-qatar-united-arab-emirates.html); Seeking 
Backers for New Fund, Jared Kushner Turns to Middle East, New York Times (Nov. 26, 2021) (online at 
www nytimes.com/2021/11/26/us/politics/kushner-investment-middle-east.html). 


100 


KUWAIT 


The records produced to the Committee by Mazars reveal that the State of Kuwait paid 
emoluments to then-President Trump’s businesses totaling $303,372. Just over $150,000 of this 
amount was paid by the Embassy of Kuwait to the Trump International Hotel in Washington, 
D.C., for banquets held in 2017 and 2018. According to public reporting, Kuwait also held a 
banquet at the hotel in 2019.4?” However, because Mazars did not produce any records 
associated with the 2019 banquet, the Committee is unable to determine the amount that the 
Embassy paid for the event. The remainder of the emoluments that Kuwait paid to then- 
President Trump’s businesses consists of charges for a property at the Trump World Tower in 
New York, which was owned by Kuwait throughout President Trump’s term.*77 


Kuwait’s Emolument Spending at Trump Properties 


Date Location Expenditure Amount 
Trump International Hotel “Embassy of Kuwait 404 
Februaty 22.201¢ (Washington, D.C.) National Day -2017” Rage 
Trump International Hotel Embassy of Kuwait 425 
Rept y2 02018 (Washington, D.C.) Banquet (2018) Si2:23% 
January 2018— up Word poner The Mission of the $38,166°°° 
December 2018 845 United Nations Plaza Cite oe await (2018) 
(New York, NY) Seg 


422 Embassy of the State of Kuwait in Washington, Press Release: Kuwait Embassy in Washington Marks 
Nat'l Celebrations (Feb. 27, 2019) (online at www kuwaitembassy.us/in-the-news/kuwait-embassy-in-washington- 
marks-natl-celebrations#slideshow-2). 


#23 New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2012112001019004 (Nov. 16, 2012) (online at 
https://a836-acris.nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2012112001019004) (accessed Dec. 
7, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 2016-2017, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, 
Lot: 1201 (Jan. 5, 2016) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 2017- 
2018, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1201 (Jan. 5, 2017) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City 
Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 2018-2019, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1201 (Jan. 5, 2018) 
(accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2019-2020, Borough: 
Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1201 (Jan. 5, 2019) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, 
Final Assessment Roll 2020-2021, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1201 (Jan. 5, 2020) (accessed Dec. 6, 
2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2021-2022, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 
1340, Lot: 1201 (Jan. 5, 2021) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023) 


424 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027307. 
#5 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027271. 


#26 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027355; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027401; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027448; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027496; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027554; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027612; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027706; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027660; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_ COMMITTEE-00027752; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027795; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027838; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027883. 


101 


Estimated Total 
Emolument for 
4 Years: 
$152,664 
(2017-2020) 


ESTIMATED EMOLUMENTS PAID BY KUWAIT $303,372 
(2017-2020) 


On November 18, 2016—just days after Donald Trump was declared the winner of the 
2016 presidential election—the then-Kuwaiti Ambassador to the United States, H-E. Salem Al- 
Sabah, reportedly and abruptly switched the venue for the “Embassy of Kuwait National Day” 
event from the Four Seasons Hotel in Washington, D.C., to the Trump International Hotel in 
Washington, D.C.*””? The Ambassador signed a “Catering Event Agreement” with the Trump 
International Hotel, in Washington, D.C., for the event at a cost of $82,713. Among the items 
that the Embassy ordered for the occasion were a “Sushi Station” for $12,000 and a “Little Italy 
Display” for $10,800.*78 The records provided by Mazars to the Committee include a copy of a 
March 1, 2017, check from the “Embassy of the State of Kuwait” made out to the “Trump 
International Hotel — Washington, D.C.” in the amount of $77,456; written in the memo section 
of the check is “Event Date: 02/22/2017.”*? The check is reproduced below. 


br 30930 
EMBASSY OF THE STATE OF KUWAIT or 
WASH NC TOM Bt Sx \ “4 1149 sient 
ORDER Ot ___Trump international Hotel- Washington, D.C. gg 7748000 
Seventy-Seven Thousand Four Hundred Fifty-Six Only****** 


Trump International Hotel 
Washington, D.C 

1100 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20004 


MEMO 
4 Event Date: 02/22/2017 


The former Ambassador’s sudden change of plan was particularly notable in light of a 
December 2016 Politico article, which reported that he “had a tentative ‘save-the-date’ 
understanding with the Four Seasons” for the National Day event, but “he’d never signed a 
formal contract” with that hotel. Politico further reported that “Al-Sabah acknowledged that 
he’d decided to hold the gathering at Trump’s hotel after the Republican won the presidency on 
Nov. 8.” According to a release on the Kuwaiti Embassy’s website, Kuwait’s 2017 National Day 


”7 Kywait Envoy: Trump Aides Didn’t Push Me to Book His Hotel, Politico (Dec. 20, 2016) (online at 
www.politico.com/story/2016/12/kuwait-donald-trump-hotel-232866). 


#8 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027303 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027306. 


”9 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027307. 


102 


celebration was attended by Secretary of the Treasury Steven Mnuchin, among other luminary 
430 
guests. 


In 2018 and 2019, the Embassy returned to the Trump International Hotel for its national 
day event.*?! Mazars produced to the Committee an email from a member of “Mazars Real 
Estate Group” to Michael Levchuck, the Area Director of Finance for the Trump International 
Hotels in New York and Washington, D.C., indicating that Kuwait paid $73,252 for the 2018 
event.**? Mazars did not produce any financial records to the Committee for Kuwait’s 2019 
national day event, but the Embassy of Kuwait issued a press release reporting that it drew a 
number of senior Trump Administration officials back to its favorite venue: 


The Kuwaiti Embassy in Washington DC held Tuesday evening a reception at the Trump 
International Hotel to mark the country’s 58th National Day and 28th Liberation Day. 


The reception was attended by top senior officials, including Secretary of Commerce 
Wilbur Ross, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Ben Carson, Administrator 
of the United States Environmental Protection Agency Andrew R. Wheeler and 
Counselor to the President Kellyanne Conway.** 


The Permanent Mission of the State of Kuwait to the United Nations also owned a unit in 
Trump World Tower in New York City that was purchased in 2012 for $4.15 million.°4 Kuwait 
paid $38,166 in base charges to Trump World Tower for the unit for 2018—the only year for 
which Mazars produced records. Assuming that these charges were unchanged throughout 
President Trump’s time in office, this report estimates that Kuwait paid President Trump’s 
business $152,664 for this property over those four years.*°° 


430 Embassy of the State of Kuwait in Washington, Press Release: The Embassy Celebrates Kuwait's 
National Day (Feb. 23, 2017) (online at www.kuwaitembassy.us/in-the-news/the-embassy-celebrates-kuwaits- 
national-day). 


431 Critics Question Undisclosed Flow of Money from Foreign Governments to Trump Properties, ABC 
News (Feb. 28, 2018) (online at https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/critics-question-undisclosed-flow-money-foreign- 
governments-trump/story?id=534 13228). 


432 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027271. 


433 Embassy of the State of Kuwait in Washington, Press Release: Kuwait Embassy in Washington Marks 
Nat'l Celebrations (Feb. 27, 2019) (online at www kuwaitembassy.us/in-the-news/kuwait-embassy-in-washington- 
marks-natl-celebrations#slideshow-2). 


44 New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2012112001019003 (online at https://a836- 
acris nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2012112001019003) (accessed Aug. 29, 2023). 


435 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027355; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027401; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027448; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027496; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027554; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027612; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027706; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027660; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027752; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027795; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027838; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027883. 


103 


INDIA 


India is home to the largest number of Trump-owned business projects outside of the 
United States—this was the case when Mr. Trump first took office and appears to remain so as of 
the writing of this report.°° Former President Trump’s numerous foreign business 
entanglements in India and his direction of U.S. foreign policy during his presidency repeatedly 
intersected, creating conspicuous conflicts of interest. Indeed, Politico observed in February 
2020 that “nowhere are the lines more blurred between Trump the statesman and Trump the 
salesman than in India.”*3” 


It was through his business ventures that Mr. Trump laid the groundwork for his uniquely 
warm relationship with Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi. In fact, while visiting the White 
House during President Trump’s Administration, Prime Minister Modi explicitly remarked that 
Mr. Trump had been “full of very warm remarks and observations for me” when Mr. Trump had 
previously been in India promoting his business interests prior to his presidency.*** 


During the Trump Administration, the Indian government spent at least $282,764 at 
Trump properties in New York City and Washington, D.C. This spending encompassed the costs 
incurred by the Indian government for two units in Trump World Tower, which they owned 
throughout the Trump presidency, as well as multiple stays at the Trump International Hotel in 
Washington, D.C., by officials from the Indian Embassy in the United States.**? 


436 Potential Conflicts Around the Globe for Trump, the Businessman President, New Y ork Times (Nov. 
26, 2016) (online at www.nytimes.com/2016/1 1/26/us/politics/donald-trump-international-business.html); Half-A- 
Dozen Trump Towers Are Set to Come Up in India, Business Today (Dec. 13, 2022) (online at 
www.businesstoday.in/latest/economy/story/half-a-dozen-trump-towers-are-set-to-come-up-in-india-356222-2022- 
12-13); Proud to be the Largest Developer of Trump Properties in the World: Kalpesh Mehta, Tribeca Developers, 
Financial Express (Sept. 5, 2023) (online at www financialexpress.com/money/proud-to-be-the-largest-developer- 
of-trump-properties-in-the-world-kalpesh-mehta-tribeca-developers-3233478/). 


437 Trump Visits a Big Foreign Market—for the U.S. and for Trump Org, Politico (Feb. 22, 2020) (online at 
www.politico.com/news/2020/02/22/trump-india-business- 116322). 


438 The American Presidency Project, Donald J. Trump, Remarks Prior to a Meeting with Prime Minister 
Narendra Modi of India (June 26, 2017) (online at www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/remarks-prior-meeting- 
with-prime-minister-narendra-modi-india). 


43° New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2004030900483001 (Mar. 5, 2004) (online at 
https://a836-acris.nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2004030900483001) (accessed Dec. 
7, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2004030900469001 (Mar. 5, 2004) (online at 
https://a836-acris.nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2004030900469001) (accessed Dec. 
7, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 2016-2017, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, 
Lot: 1199 (Jan. 5, 2016) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 2017- 
2018, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1199 (Jan. 5, 2017) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City 
Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 2018-2019, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1199 (Jan. 5, 2018) 
(accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2019-2020, Borough: 
Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1199 (Jan. 5, 2019) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, 
Final Assessment Roll 2020-2021, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1199 (Jan. 5, 2020) (accessed Dec. 6, 
2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2021-2022, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 
1340, Lot: 1199 (Jan. 5, 2021) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 
2016-2017, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1233 (Jan. 5, 2016) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City 
Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 2017-2018, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1233 (Jan. 5, 2017) 
(accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 2018-2019, Borough: Manhattan, 


104 


At the same time, The Trump Organization, led by Donald Trump Jr. and Eric Trump, 
was moving ahead on multiple projects in India while their father was President. In 2019, 
OpenSecrets described the importance of the Indian market for Mr. Trump’s business, noting, 
“The Trump Organization covets perhaps no other foreign country more than India.”*4° 
Together, India’s emolument spending at Trump properties and Mr. Trump’s deep business ties to 


India enriched Donald Trump by potentially millions of dollars while he was in office.*! 
India’s Emolument Spending at Trump Properties 
Date Location Expenditure Amount 
2017-2020 Trump World Tower Permanent $66,046*7 
845 United Nations Plaza | Mission of India (2018) 
en ony) Estimated Total 
Emolument for 4 Years: 
$264,184 
(2017-2020) 
February 18-19, Trump International Hotel | Stays by Indian $18,580*% 
2017; February (Washington, D.C.) Diplomats 
21-24, 2017; 
March 5-18, 2017 
ESTIMATED EMOLUMENTS PAID BY INDIA $282,764 
(2017-2020) 


Block: 1340, Lot: 1233 (Jan. 5, 2018) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final 
Assessment Roll 2019-2020, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1233 (Jan. 5, 2019) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); 
New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2020-2021, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 
1233 (Jan. 5, 2020) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2021- 
2022, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1233 (Jan. 5, 2021) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023). 


#40 OpenSecrets, World of Influence: A Guide to Trump’s Foreign Business Interests (June 4, 2019) (online 
at www.opensecrets.org/news/2019/06/trump-foreign-business-interests/). 


41 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027355 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027886; Trump’s D.C. Hotel Hosted Diplomats from These 33 Countries, Forbes (Oct. 10, 2021) (online at 
www forbes.com/sites/zacheverson/2021/10/10/trumps-dc-hotel-hosted-foreign-officials-from-these-33-countries- 
while-he-was-in-office/); Aroon Deep @AroonDeep, X (formerly Twitter) (Feb. 18, 2018) (online at 
https://twitter.com/AroonDeep/status/966853259041308673). Mr. Deep’s post on X states that the total amount of 
the stays by the Indian diplomats at the Trump International Hotel was $18,650; however, the document provided in 
the X post records expenditures totaling only $18,580 and that is the figure provided in this report. MAZARS- 
OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008041; OpenSecrets, World of Influence: A Guide to Trump’s Foreign Business 
Interests (June 4, 2019) (online at www.opensecrets.org/news/2019/06/trump-foreign-business-interests/). 


442 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027355 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027886. 


“43 Trump ’s D.C. Hotel Hosted Diplomats from These 33 Countries, Forbes (Oct. 10, 2021) (online at 
www forbes.com/sites/zacheverson/202 1/10/10/trumps-dc-hotel-hosted-foreign-officials-from-these-33-countries- 
while-he-was-in-office/); Aroon Deep @AroonDeep, X (formerly Twitter) (Feb. 18, 2018) (online at 
https://twitter.com/AroonDeep/status/966853259041308673). Mr. Deep’s post on X states that the total amount of 
the stay by the Indian diplomats at the Trump International Hotel was $18,650; however, the document provided in 
the X post records expenditures totaling only $18,580, which is the figure provided in this report. MAZARS- 
OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008041. 


105 


Mr. Trump had been conducting business in India for over a decade before he took office 
and had five projects underway at various stages of development when he was sworn in as 
President.**+ He partnered with influential businesspeople in the country, many of whom were 
well-connected politically, but whose business practices have been called into question. For 
example, Mr. Trump entered into business with several individuals implicated in investigations 
by Indian authorities involving accusations of fraud and other financial misconduct.4° Some of 
those companies continued to face investigations during Mr. Trump’s presidency.*“° 


Mr. Trump reportedly made a positive first impression on Mr. Modi years before he was 
elected president. In August 2014, shortly after Mr. Modi was elected as India’s Prime Minister, 
Mr. Trump traveled to Mumbai to promote a Trump-branded project. During that business trip, 
Trump praised Prime Minister Modi, who was a political ally of Mr. Trump’s business partner on 
the Mumbai project, Mangal Prabhat Lodha. In addition to being one of India’s wealthiest 
businessmen, Mr. Lodha is also reportedly a “powerful,” long-serving state legislator and leader 
in the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), Mr. Modi’s political party.“47 In 2013, when Trump’s 
Mumbai Tower deal was announced, several of Mr. Lodha’s companies had reportedly been 
under investigation by Indian officials for corrupt practices and tax evasion, and the Mumbai 
development was not “a sure thing.” The project’s prospects improved, however, after Mr. Modi 
took office. Under the Modi government, the investigations into Mr. Lodha’s companies began 
to wind down, with several investigators alleging that they were forced to end their cases 
prematurely at the urging of “loyalists” to Prime Minister Modi, according to reporting from the 
New Republic. “® 


During his 2014 visit to India, Mr. Trump said that he was looking forward to doing 
business under the Modi Administration, stating: “I do see India as a great place to invest, and I 
think the election made that even better.” Mr. Trump also commented, “People are coming into 
India now that maybe would not have prior to the election.” He promised, “We will make 
investments in India, substantial investments in India. It’s a great place to invest.”44? Mr. Trump 


444 Potential Conflicts Around the Globe for Trump, the Businessman President, New York Times (Nov. 26, 
2016) (online at www.nytimes.com/2016/11/26/us/politics/donald-trump-international-business.html). 


445 Td_; The Many Red Flags of Trump’ Partners in India—‘Trump, Inc.’ Podcast, ProPublica (Mar. 28, 
2018) (online at www.propublica.org/article/trump-inc-podcast-trumps-partners-in-india-many-red-flags). 


446 Political Corruption and the Art of the Deal, New Republic (Mar. 21, 2018) (online at 
https://newrepublic.com/article/14735 1/political-corruption-art-deal); Trump s 10 Troubling Deals with Foreign 
Power-Players, ProPublica (Jan. 19, 2017) (online at https://projects.propublica.org/trump-conflicts/). 


447 Trumps Set to Launch Two Real Estate Projects in India, Despite Conflict-Of-Interest Concerns, 
Washington Post (Oct. 28, 2017) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/trumps-set-to-launch-two- 
real-estate-projects-in-india-despite-conflict-of-interest-concerns/2017/10/27/f7de887c-a2d9-11e7-b573- 
8ec86cdfeled_story html); Political Corruption and the Art of the Deal, New Republic (Mar. 21, 2018) (online at 
https://newrepublic.com/article/ 14735 1/political-corruption-art-deal). 


448 Donald Trump Back in Mumbai, This Time with Lodha Group, Business Standard (Sept. 17, 2013) 
(online at www. business-standard.com/article/companies/donald-trump-back-in-mumbai-this-time-with-lodha- 
group-113091700640_1.html); Political Corruption and the Art of the Deal, New Republic (Mar. 21, 2018) (online 
at https://newrepublic.com/article/14735 1/political-corruption-art-deal); OpenSecrets, World of Influence: A Guide 
to Trumps Foreign Business Interests (June 4, 2019) (online at www.opensecrets.org/news/2019/06/trump-foreign- 
business-interests/). 


44 Donald Trump Plans Investment in India, CNBC (Aug. 12, 2014) (online at 
106 


reportedly “gave more than a dozen interviews to the local media, repeatedly praising Modi for 
doing a ‘spectacular job’ and improving the country’s image around the world.”*°° 


Ahead of Mr. Trump’s presidential inauguration, public reporting observed that his 
significant business ventures in India created a “potentially serious ethical hazard for a United 
States president who is also a real estate mogul.”**! As the New York Times explained in 
November 2016: 


Several of Mr. Trump’s real estate ventures in India—where he has more projects 
underway than in any location outside North America—are being built through 
companies with family ties to India’s most important political party. This makes it more 
likely that Indian government officials will do special favors benefiting Mr. Trump’s 
projects, including pressuring state-owned banks to extend favorable loans.*>? 


Even as he was preparing to take office, Mr. Trump made time to meet with several of his 
Indian business partners. The week after his election, President-elect Trump met at Trump Tower 
in New York with three of the Indian businessmen with whom he worked on a real estate 
development project in the country. Mr. Trump reportedly discussed both his business ventures 
in India as well as politics—including his affinity for Prime Minister Modi—at this meeting.*°? 


Also in November 2016, India’s foreign secretary, S. Jaishankar, reportedly met with 
“very senior” members of President-elect Trump’s transition team during a visit to the United 
States, doing so “[a]midst reports that efforts are on to fix an early meeting between Prime 
Minister Narendra Modi and Donald Trump.”4°4 


Mr. Modi would not forget Mr. Trump’s kind words, nor his record as a businessman. 
According to OpenSecrets, during his official visit to the White House in June 2017, the Prime 
Minister “reminisced over Trump’s kind comments made during his 2014 trip to India.”*** The 
translated comments of the Prime Minister included the following statement: “I do remember 


www.cnbc.com/2014/08/12/donald-trump-plans-investment-in-india html). 
40 Political Corruption and the Art of the Deal, New Republic (Mar. 21, 2018) (online at 
https://newrepublic.com/article/14735 1/political-corruption-art-deal). 


4 


>! Potential Conflicts Around the Globe for Trump, the Businessman President, New York Times (Nov. 26, 
2016) (online at www.nytimes.com/2016/11/26/us/politics/donald-trump-international-business.html). 


452 Td. 


4 


%3 Donald Trump Meeting Suggests He Is Keeping Up His Business Ties, New York Times (Nov. 19, 2016) 
(online at www nytimes.com/2016/11/20/us/politics/donald-trump-pauses-transition-work-to-meet-with-indian- 
business-partners.html). 


454 E'S Jaishankar Meets Trumps Transition Team During US Visit, Economic Times (Nov. 24, 2016) 
(online at https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics-and-nation/fs-jaishankar-meets-trumps-transition- 
team-during-us-visit/articleshow/55605894.cms). 


45 OpenSecrets, World of Influence: A Guide to Trump’ Foreign Business Interests (June 4, 2019) (online 
at www.opensecrets.org/news/2019/06/trump-foreign-business-interests/); Trump Meets Indias Leader, A Fellow 
Nationalist Battling China for His Favor, New York Times (June 26, 2017) (online at 
www.nytimes.com/2017/06/26/us/politics/donald-trump-narendra-modi-india html). 


107 


very well that when President Trump, when he was not even President, visited India. And when 
in a media interview, he was asked about me. He was full of very warm remarks and 
observations for me. I still remember them today.”4°° 


Prime Minister Modi also lauded Mr. Trump’s “vast and successful” business experience, 
which the Prime Minister “predicted would galvanize relations between the United States and 
India,” according to the New York Times.*’ The Wall Street Journal reported that Prime Minister 
Modi’s visit to the White House came “‘amid differences between Messrs. Modi and Trump on 
issues such as trade, climate change and immigration” but that “the two men papered over their 
differences as they worked to establish a rapport in discussions set over approximately four 
hours, including a private dinner at the White House. They hugged after their public 
statements.””4°8 


Continued Promotion of Trump Businesses During the Trump Presidency 


Just one month after the June 2017 visit of Prime Minister Modi to the White House, the 
Wall Street Journal reported that “[p|romotional material for the Trump Tower in Mumbai 
improperly featured a reference to President Donald Trump, showing how difficult it is to 
separate the president from a brand whose value is based on his name.” The material reportedly 
stated: “The world’s glitterati have always chosen a unique landmark: Trump,” and included the 
words: “Donald Trump. The Man. The Icon.” In addition, “an accompanying email did refer to 
Mr. Trump as POTUS—short for President of the United States—and cited a tweet in which he 
called the project ‘incredible.’” After being contacted by the press, “the Trump Organization and 
an Indian development firm marketing the project said the materials had been sent out by a 
broker without their authorization, and won’t be used again.”**? The invocation of then- 
President Trump in this marketing campaign nevertheless reflects both how active Mr. Trump’s 
business in India remained during his presidency as well as how President Trump and his Indian 
business stood to profit from his presidency. 


In the months that followed Prime Minister Modi’s visit to the White House, Ivanka 
Trump, as a White House official, and Donald Trump Jr., as the head of The Trump Organization, 
would each make working trips to India.*°° In November 2017, Ms. Trump led the U.S. 


456 The American Presidency Project, Donald J. Trump, Remarks Prior to a Meeting with Prime Minister 
Narendra Modi of India (June 26, 2017) (online at www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/remarks-prior-meeting- 
with-prime-minister-narendra-modi-india). 


457 Trump Meets India’s Leader, a Fellow Nationalist Battling China for His Favor, New York Times (June 
26, 2017) (online at www.nytimes.com/2017/06/26/us/politics/donald-trump-narendra-modi-india.html). 


458 Trump and Indian Prime Minister Modi Move to Bridge Divisions, Wall Street Journal (June 26, 2017) 
(online at www.wsj.com/articles/president-trump-greets-indian-prime-minister-modi-at-the-white-house- 
1498511769). 


49 Pitch for Trump Tower Mumbai Plays Up Connection to Donald Trump, Wall Street Journal (July 26, 
2017) (online at www.wsj.com/articles/pitch-for-trump-tower-mumbai-plays-up-connection-to-donald-trump- 
1501061401). 


460 Luxury Property Ad Blitz Heralds Trump Son’s Visit to India, Washington Post (Feb. 20, 2018) (online at 
www.washingtonpost.com/business/donald-trump-jr-arrives-in-india-to-help-sell-apartments/2018/02/20/c91141d2- 
1602-11e8-930c-45838ad0d77a_story html). 


108 


delegation to the Global Entrepreneurship Summit in Hyderabad, India, at the invitation of Prime 
Minister Modi, who accompanied her at the event.*°! 


Weeks before Ms. Trump’s visit, the Washington Post reported that Donald Trump Jr. was 
expected to travel to India to launch Trump Organization residential projects planned for 
Kolkata, in the Indian state of West Bengal, and in Gurgaon, a suburb of New Delhi. Both 
projects had been “inked” prior to Mr. Trump’s election and continued “the family’s promotion 
of the Trump empire despite concerns over the president’s potential conflicts of interest with 
foreign governments.”*” 


The New Republic reported that “clearances for the Gurgaon Trump Towers went through 
in ‘no time,’ based on directives from BJP party leaders in New Delhi” shortly after Ms. Trump’s 
November 2017 visit to the country for the Global Entrepreneurship Summit.*© 


Mr. Trump Jr. eventually flew to India in February 2018, where he promoted The Trump 
Organization’s real estate projects on a multi-city tour that alarmed ethics experts. While in New 
Delhi to publicize the Trump-branded residential building in Gurgaon, major Indian newspapers 
carried front-page ads featuring photos of Mr. Trump Jr., asking, “TRUMP HAS ARRIVED. 
HAVE YOU?” and “TRUMP IS HERE. ARE YOU INVITED?” According to Politico, “His 
trip net[ted] $15 million in real estate sales for the Trump Towers in Gurgaon.” Notably, Mr. 
Trump Jr. also had a closed-door meeting with Prime Minister Modi while on this business 
ig." 


Donald Trump Jr. continued to personally promote the Trump-branded projects in India 
throughout his father’s presidency. In 2019, he reportedly met with the buyers of residences in 
Trump Towers Delhi who had been flown to New York City as part of a promotional effort 
intended “to generate interest in the properties in India.” They “stayed at Trump Tower and 
dined with Trump Jr. at Trump Ferry Point.” Politico reported that “at least one buyer gushed 
about meeting the son of the president.”*°° One attendee told the Telegraph India, “It’s a dream 
come true, shaking hands with the son of the U.S. president. I am ready to buy one more flat if 
they give it me [sic] at the old price. I am ready to make a single shot payment right now.”4°° 


461 The White House, Ivanka Trump Advisor to the President (accessed Sept. 7, 2023) (online at 
https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/people/ivanka-trump/); Ivanka Trump s India Visit Raises Questions About 
Her Brand, CNBC (Nov. 28, 2017) (online at www.cnbe.com/2017/11/28/ivanka-trumps-india-visit-raises- 
questions-about-her-brand.html). 


462 Trumps Set to Launch Two Real Estate Projects in India, Despite Conflict-of-Interest Concerns, 
Washington Post (Oct. 28, 2017) (online at online at www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/trumps-set-to- 
launch-two-real-estate-projects-in-india-despite-conflict-of-interest-concerns/2017/10/27/f7de887c-a2d9-11e7-b573- 
8ec86cdfeled_story html). 


463 Political Corruption and the Art of the Deal, New Republic (Mar. 21, 2018) (online at 
https://newrepublic.com/article/14735 1/political-corruption-art-deal). 


464 Trump Visits a Big Foreign Market—jor the U.S. and for Trump Org, Politico (Feb. 22, 2020) (online at 
www.politico.com/news/2020/02/22/trump-india-business- 116322). 


#09 Td. 


4 


6° Brand Trumps Downturn Blues, Telegraph India (Sept. 19, 2022) (online at 
www.telegraphindia.com/business/brand-trumps-downturn-blues/cid/1 706834). 


109 


OpenSecrets reported that, “The Trump Organization’s successes in India have coincided 
largely with Trump’s November 2016 election win,” and these projects were indeed lucrative for 
Mr. Trump during his time in office. Trump Towers Mumbai earned then-President Trump 
between $1 million and $5 million in licensing fees in 2017 alone—even before occupants had 
been able to move into the building.*°’ Then-President Trump disclosed that he earned between 
$100,001 to $1 million from the project during each of the remaining years of his presidency. **° 
Similarly, he disclosed earning between $100,001 and $1 million in annual income from DT 
Tower Kolkata LLC, his licensing entity for Trump Tower Kolkata, on his financial disclosures 
covering the first three years of his presidency. Mr. Trump disclosed that during his last year in 
office, he earned between $50,001 and $100,000 from that venture.*©? 


With Mr. Trump’s businesses running smoothly in India during his presidency, Mr. Trump 
and Mr. Modi continued to publicly support one another and maintain a strong personal 
relationship. In September 2019, then-President Trump again hosted Mr. Modi in the United 
States—this time “in Houston, Texas, at ‘Howdy, Modi!’-a mega-rally attended by some 50,000 
Indian Americans.”*”° Months later, in February 2020, Prime Minister Modi hosted a “Namaste, 
Trump!” rally in the city of Ahmedabad “at the opening of the world’s largest cricket 
stadium.”47! At this rally, which occurred during President Trump’s first and only visit as 
President to India, Modi and Trump—who was accompanied by First Lady Melania Trump, his 
daughter and Advisor Ivanka Trump, and his son-in-law and Senior Advisor Jared Kushner— 
spoke to “a cheering crowd of more than 100,000.47 


467 OpenSecrets, World of Influence: A Guide to Trump ’s Foreign Business Interests (June 4, 2019) (online 
at www.opensecrets.org/news/2019/06/trump-foreign-business-interests/). 


468 Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 
278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed May 15, 2018) (online at https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/21154685/trump- 
oge-2018.pdf); Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 
278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed May 15, 2019) (online at https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/2 1154683/trump- 
oge-2019.pdf); Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 
278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed July 31, 2020) (online https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/7012257/President- 
Donald-Trump-2020-financial-disclosure.pdf); Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public 
Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed Jan. 15, 2021) (online at 
https://extapps2.oge.gov/201/Presiden nsf/PAS+Index/6E78B 163F816EF6A852586630075291D/$FILE/Trump,%20 
Donald%20J.%202021Termination%:20278.pdf); What We Know About Trump's Business Empire Trump Tower 
Mumbai Worli, CNN (2018) (online at www.cnn.com/interactive/2018/politics/trump-business-empire/?asset=56). 


49 Td.; What We Know About Trump’ Business Empire Trump DT Tower Kolkata LLC, CNN (2018) (online 
at www.cnn.com/interactive/20 18/politics/trump-business-empire/?asset=124); Trump Visits a Big Foreign Market— 
for the U.S. and for Trump Org, Politico (Feb. 22, 2020) (online at www.politico.com/news/2020/02/22/trump-india- 
business- 116322). 


470 League of Nationalists; How Trump and Modi Refashioned the U.S.-Indian Relationship, Foreign 
Affairs (Aug. 2020) (online at www foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2020-08-11/modi-india-league- 
nationalists). 


471 ‘Namaste Trump’: Modi Holds Huge Rally for President’s Visit, Reuters (Feb. 23, 2020) (online at 
www reuters.com/article/us-india-usa-trump/namaste-trump-modi-holds-huge-rally-for-presidents-visit- 
idUSKCN20I0B6). 


4. India Set to Welcome Trump Whose Ist Stop Will Be in Modis Home State Of Gujarat, NPR (Feb. 23, 
2020) (online at www.npr.org/2020/02/23/80748 1509/india-set-to-welcome-trump-whose-first-stop-will-be-in- 
modis-home-state-of-gujar); ‘Namaste Trump!’ India’s Modi Welcomes U.S. Leader With an Epic Party, NPR (Feb. 
24, 2020) (online at www.npr.org/2020/02/24/808096 104/namaste-trump-india-greets-u-s-leader-with-epic-party- 


110 


Before becoming Prime Minister, Modi had been chief minister of the state of Gujarat, 
where Ahmedabad is located. In 2002, during Modi’s tenure as Gujarat’s chief minister, a train 
carrying Hindu pilgrims from a religious site was set on fire near Ahmedabad, unleashing 
sectarian violence in which, reportedly, “the official death toll was more than 1,000, including 
790 Muslims and 254 Hindus,” although “the real numbers are believed to be much higher.”47? 


At the 2020 rally in India, then-President Trump praised the “special relationship” that 
the United States had with India, stating, “We think we’re at a point where our relationship is so 
special with India. It has never been as good as it is right now, and I think that’s because of the 
two leaders of each country—really we feel very strongly about each other.”*”4 


Elsewhere during his visit to India, then-President Trump defended Prime Minister Modi 
as a proponent of religious freedom, even as violent protests broke out over a controversial 
citizenship law championed by the Prime Minister that was widely perceived as anti-Muslim.*”° 
At a news conference during his visit, President Trump said, “We did talk about religious 
freedom, and I will say that the prime minister was incredible in what he told me. He wants 
people to have religious freedom and very strongly.”4”° 


After leaving office, Mr. Trump spoke again of the importance of the special relationship 
he developed with India as President. He stated in a 2023 interview, “I think India has never had 
a better friend than me. [...] And that’s one of the relationships that, you know, I’ve formed. 
But India has never had a better friend as President than me.”*”” 


and-modest-policy-aims); Department of State Office of the Historian, Presidential Trips to India (online at 
https://history.state.gov/departmenthistory/travels/president/india) (accessed Oct. 3, 2023); Trump Tours India on 
36-hour Visit, USA Today (Feb. 24, 2020) (online at www.usatoday.com/picture- 
gallery/news/world/2020/02/24/trump-tours-india-36-hour-visit/4856153002/). 


473 Td. 


474 The White House, Remarks by President Trump and Prime Minister Modi of India in Joint Press 
Statement (Feb. 25, 2020) (online at https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefings-statements/remarks-president- 
trump-prime-minister-modi-india-joint-press-statement-2/). 


475 Protests in New Delhi Against India’s Citizenship Law Ahead of Trump Visit, Reuters (Feb. 23, 2020) 
(online at www reuters.com/article/us-india-citizenship-protests/protests-in-new-delhi-against-indias-citizenship- 
law-ahead-of-trump-visit-idUSKCN20HOM2); Trump Praises Modis Record on Religious Tolerance as Violence 
Erupts Over India’s Treatment of Muslims, Washington Post (Feb. 25, 2020) (online at 
www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-india-modi-citizenship-law-muslims/2020/02/25/9358aef8-57b5- 1 1ea- 
ab68-101ecfec2532_story.html). The citizenship law—‘which grants citizenship for refugees of every major South 
Asian religion except Muslims”—was “seen by opponents as discriminating against Muslims” and “undermining 
India’s secular traditions.” Delhi Rocked by Deadly Protests During Donald Trumps India Visit, The Guardian 
(Feb. 25, 2020) (online at www.theguardian.com/world/2020/feb/25/delhi-rocked-by-deadly-protests-during-donald- 
trumps-india-visit). 


476 Trump Praises Modi’s Record on Religious Tolerance as Violence Erupts Over India’s Treatment of 
Muslims, Washington Post (Feb. 25, 2020) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-india-modi- 
citizenship-law-muslims/2020/02/25/9358aef8-57b5-11ea-ab68-101ecfec2532_story.html). 


471 PM Narendra Modi ‘Doing A Terrific Job’, Says Former US president Donald Trump, Economic Times 
(Sept. 8, 2022) (online at https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/india/pm-narendra-modi-doing-a-terrific-job- 
says-former-us-president-donald-trump/articleshow/94081255.cms). 


111 


Emoluments Paid by India to Trump-Owned Businesses 


According to documents produced by Mazars to the Committee, the Permanent Mission 
of India to the United Nations owned two units in Trump World Tower in New York which 
incurred combined common charges in 2018 of $66,046. Assuming that these charges did not 
change over the course of the Trump presidency, this report estimates that India paid at least 
$264,184 to Trump World Tower during the Trump Administration for these units. This 
estimated total does not include additional charges paid by India in 2018 beyond the baseline 
common fees—such as charges for electricity as well as special assessments—and is therefore 
almost certainly an underestimate. In 2018—the only year for which Mazars provided records 
pertaining to these units—in addition to the $66,046 in common charges, India also paid $13,983 
in additional charges and fees.*”8 


In addition to the emoluments recorded in the Mazars records, according to a public 
disclosure made by the Indian government following a records request from a journalist, eight 
Indian diplomats spent $18,580 at Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., in February 
and March 2017.4”? Mr. Modi’s first and only visit to the White House during Trump’s 
presidency occurred in June 2017.*°° A document provided to the Committee by Mazars shows 
the “Embassy of India” had an account at a Trump-owned property with a start date of 
“03/07/2017,” but the document does not show the dates or charges for stay(s) associated with 
this account (or even the property where the stay(s) occurred).*®! Given that documentation 
from the Indian government confirming expenditures by India at the Trump International Hotel 
in Washington, D.C., is publicly available—and that an account for the Embassy of India is noted 
in a document produced to the Committee by Mazars—this report includes the sum disclosed by 
the Indian government in the total amount of the emoluments paid by India to then-President 
Trump. 


478 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE-00027355 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027886; New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2003010601397001 (online at https://a836- 
acris nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2003010601397001) (accessed Oct. 2, 2023). 


4” Trumps D.C. Hotel Hosted Diplomats from These 33 Countries, Forbes (Oct. 10, 2021) (online at 
www.forbes.com/sites/zacheverson/202 1/10/10/trumps-dc-hotel-hosted-foreign-officials-from-these-33-countries- 
while-he-was-in-office/); Aroon Deep @AroonDeep, X (Feb. 18, 2018) (online at 
https://twitter.com/AroonDeep/status/96685325904 1308673). Mr. Deep’s post on X states that the total amount of 
the stay by the Indian diplomats at the Trump International Hotel was $18,650; however, the document provided in 
the X post records expenditures totaling only $18,580 and that is the figure provided in this report. 


480 Trump and Modi Reaffirm Indian-US Relations with a Hug, CNN (June 27, 2017) (online at 
www.cnn.com/2017/06/27/politics/modi-trump-india-us/index.html); Department of State Office of the Historian, 
Visits by Foreign Leaders of India (online at https://history.state.gov/departmenthistory/visits/india) (accessed Oct. 
3, 2023). 


481 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008041. 


112 


PHILIPPINES 


In June 2018, while the President of the Philippines was seeking a free-trade deal with the 
United States, the country’s Embassy held its National Day Reception at the Trump International 
Hotel in Washington, D.C. The Embassy of the Philippines paid nearly $75,000 for the 
reception—a move that the Philippine Ambassador to the United States acknowledged had 
“political undertones.”4°” 


At the time, then-President Trump showed his eagerness to foster a friendly relationship 
with the then-President of the Philippines, Rodrigo Duterte. President Trump repeatedly praised 
Duterte, even as the authoritarian ruler was accused of orchestrating the extrajudicial killings of 
thousands of Filipino citizens.**° 


In addition, Mr. Trump maintained a financial stake in a Trump-branded apartment 
complex in Manila that earned him millions of dollars while he was President.*** 


Philippines’ Emolument Spending at Trump Properties 


Date Location Expenditure Amount 
June 12, 2018 Trump International Hotel “Embassy of the $74,810*%5 
(Washington, D.C.) Philippines National Day 
Reception” 


Trade Negotiations with the Philippines 


In the days before Mr. Trump’s election in November 2016, then-Philippine President 
Duterte selected an individual with close ties to Mr. Trump, Jose E.B. Antonio—a real estate 
developer and “Trump’s business partner in Manila”—as his trade envoy to Washington. At the 
time, Mr. Antonio’s company was building a Trump-branded apartment complex in Manila, 
which would generate significant income for Mr. Trump during his time in office.**° 


Then-President Duterte hoped to negotiate a free-trade agreement with the United States 
that would have allowed the Philippines to expand the markets for its exports. This proposed 


482 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008504; Jose Manuel Romualdez, Our Special 120th 
Independence Day DC Celebration, Philippine Star (Apr. 22, 2018) (online at 
www.philstar.com/opinion/2018/04/22/1808 198/our-special- 1 20th-independence-day-dc-celebration). 


483 Trump Praises Duterte for Philippine Drug Crackdown in Call Transcript, New York Times (May 23, 
2017) (online at www.nytimes.com/2017/05/23/us/politics/trump-duterte-phone-transcript-philippine-drug- 
crackdown html). 


484 Tong-Concealed Records Show Trump’s Chronic Losses and Years of Tax Avoidance, New York Times 
(Sept. 27, 2020) (online at www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/09/27/us/donald-trump-taxes.html). 


485 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008504; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027271. 


486 Trump Business Partner is Philippines’ New Trade Envoy to U.S., New York Times (Nov. 9, 2016) 
(online at www.nytimes.com/2016/11/10/world/asia/donald-trump-philippines-jose-antonio html). 


113 


deal was intended to build on the existing trade relationship between the countries, whose two- 
way trade totaled $27 billion in 2016. At the time, approximately 75% of exports from the 
Philippines already entered the United States duty-free.*®” 


In November 2017, then-President Duterte spoke directly with then-President Trump 
about a potential free-trade agreement during a private meeting in Manila while Mr. Trump was 
in the Philippines for the Association of Southeast Asian Nations summit.*8* A spokesperson for 
then-President Duterte said: “The Philippine side expressed their hope that an FTA or free trade 
agreement must be concluded between the Philippines and the United States.”*°? A joint 
statement from Mr. Trump and Mr. Duterte confirmed that both leaders discussed their interests 
in a possible free-trade agreement: “The United States welcomed the Philippines’ interest in a 
bilateral free trade agreement and both sides agreed to discuss the matter further through the 
United States-Philippines [Trade and Investment Framework Agreement].”*°° Mr. Antonio was 
also present during this discussion.*”! 


Human Rights Violations 


While then-President Trump was discussing a possible trade deal with the Philippines, 
then-President Duterte was being widely condemned on the world stage for human rights 
violations, particularly his violent crackdown on illegal drugs that involved the extrajudicial and 
arbitrary killings of thousands of alleged drug suspects. Mr. Trump not only failed to condemn 
the authoritarian ruler for his brutal practices, but actually “congratulat[ed] Mr. Duterte for the 
government-sanctioned attacks on drug suspects.”*°* During an April 2017 phone call, Mr. 
Trump told Mr. Duterte that he was doing an “unbelievable job on the drug problem” and invited 
him to the White House—making a powerful gesture to the authoritarian ruler that reportedly 
stunned even Mr. Trump’s own aides.*”? Following his November 2017 meeting with Mr. 
Duterte in Manila, during which the leaders discussed trade policy, then-President Trump told 


487 Philippines, U.S. to Start Free Trade Talks in September, Reuters (July 12, 2018) (online at 
www reuters.com/article/uk-philippines-usa-trade/philippines-u-s-to-start-free-trade-talks-in-september- 
id(UKKBN1K20XW). 


488 Td. 


48° Office of the President of the Philippines Presidential Communications Office, Press Release: Duterte, 
Trump Talk About Free Trade, Illegal Drugs, Marawi Aid (Nov. 13, 2017) (online at 
https://pco.gov.ph/news_releases/duterte-trump-talk-free-trade-illegal-drugs-marawi-aid/). 


40 The American Presidency Project, Joint Statement by President Trump and President Rodrigo Duterte 
of the Philippines (Nov. 13, 2017) (online at www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/joint-statement-president-trump- 
and-president-rodrigo-duterte-the-philippines). 


*! Trump Lauds ‘Great Relationship’ with Duterte in Manila, New York Times (Nov. 13, 2017) (online at 
www nytimes.com/2017/11/13/world/asia/trump-duterte-philippines html). 


42 Trump Praises Duterte for Philippine Drug Crackdown in Call Transcript, New York Times (May 23, 
2017) (online at www.nytimes.com/2017/05/23/us/politics/trump-duterte-phone-transcript-philippine-drug- 
crackdown html). 


493 Id.; Trump’s Very Friendly’ Talk with Duterte Stuns Aides and Critics Alike, New York Times (Apr. 
30, 2017) (online at www.nytimes.com/2017/04/30/us/politics/trump-duterte html). 


114 


reporters that he and the Philippine president had a “great relationship,” while avoiding questions 
from the press about Mr. Duterte’s record of human rights abuses.*”4 


Emoluments Paid by the Philippines to Trump-Owned Businesses 


In April 2018, amid then-President Duterte’s continued push for a free-trade agreement, 
the Philippines announced that it would hold its Independence Day reception at the Trump 
International Hotel in Washington, D.C., in June of that year.”> According to a receipt produced 
to the Committee by Mazars, the Embassy of the Philippines paid $74,810 for the reception.*”° 
The Philippine Ambassador to the United States, Jose Manuel Romualdez, explicitly 
acknowledged that then-President Trump’s ownership of the hotel factored into his decision to 
hold the event at the hotel: 


The Trump hotel may have some political undertones because it is associated with the 
U.S. president, but since several other embassies have also held their national day 
celebrations at the Trump hotel which were well attended—I decided—why not do it 
there, too.*?” 


On July 12, 2018, one month to the day after the Philippines’ June 12, 2018, reception at 
Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., Mr. Romualdez announced that the Philippines 
would begin negotiating a proposed free trade deal with the United States in September 2018, 
which he said could take years to complete.*?* The Trump Administration ultimately did not 
enter into a free-trade agreement with the Philippines.*” 


44 Trump Lauds ‘Great Relationship’ with Duterte in Manila, New York Times (Nov. 13, 2017) (online at 
www nytimes.com/2017/11/13/world/asia/trump-duterte-philippines html). 


4°5 Philippines Latest Foreign Country to Book Trump’s DC Hotel, Associated Press (Apr. 18, 2018) 
(online at https://apnews.com/article/philippines-north-america-donald-trump-turkey-politics- 
9d68 161 fe26f44638cd74cb1a943501e). While Democratic criticism was aimed at the Generalized System of 
Preference governing U.S. trade with the Philippines, rather than the FTA sought by Duterte, it was nonetheless 
applicable to consideration of liberalizing trade with the Philippines given the country’s human rights record at the 
time. 


46 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008504. 


47 Jose Manuel Romualdez, Our Special 120th Independence Day DC Celebration, Philippine Star (Apr. 


22, 2018) (online at www.philstar.com/opinion/2018/04/22/1808 198/our-special-120th-independence-day-dc- 
celebration); Checking In at Trump Hotels, for Kinship (and Maybe Some Sway), New York Times (Sept. 7, 2019) 
(online at www.nytimes.com/2019/09/07/us/politics/trump-hotel.html). 


4°8 Philippines, U.S. to Start Free Trade Talks in September, Reuters (July 12, 2018) (online at 
www reuters.com/article/uk-philippines-usa-trade/philippines-u-s-to-start-free-trade-talks-in-september- 
idUKKBN1K20XW). 


49 See Free Trade Agreements, Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (accessed Sept. 18, 2023) (online 
at https://ustr.gov/trade-agreements/free-trade-agreements). 


115 


Trump Business Entanglements in the Philippines 


In addition to the emolument from the Philippines’ government for its Independence Day 
event, then-President Trump received millions of dollars during his presidency from the Trump 
Tower Manila apartment building, which opened in 2017.° 


Precisely how much Mr. Trump earned from the project while he was President is not 
clear. As the New York Times found in 2020, it appears that then-President Trump underreported 
his income from the Manila apartment complex in his financial disclosures. The low end of 
former President Trump’s disclosed income for the project was $4.1 million, but this was “less 
than half of the $9.3 million he actually made,” according to the publication’s analysis of tax 
documents it had obtained exclusively. The New York Times also reported that in 2017 and 2018 
alone, he earned $3 million from the development.>”! 


Another troubling aspect of the project was when then-President Trump’s image was 
used to promote the Manila tower project after he took office despite assurances from The 
Trump Organization that such overseas marketing campaigns would be halted during his 
presidency. According to the Washington Post, a video advertisement that included images of 
the President playing golf—and also featured Ivanka Trump, then a White House Advisor— 
promising that residents would “live and breathe” luxury at the Manila Tower remained available 
on a YouTube account tied to the project’s developer as of May 2017. Promotional materials 
“that featured pictures of and a quote from Trump, as well as photographs of Ivanka Trump” 
were “on hand” at the development company’s sales center in Manila at this time. As the 
Washington Post observed, “The Trump Tower Manila shows why Trump can never truly 
separate himself from his brand.”*”” This disturbing episode followed a similar marketing 
campaign for a Trump project in India. Both demonstrated Donald Trump’s unabashed 
willingness to do business as president. 


5° Long-Concealed Records Show Trump’s Chronic Losses and Years of Tax Avoidance, New Y ork Times 
(Sept. 27, 2020) (online at www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/09/27/us/donald-trump-taxes.html); Trump ’s 10 
Troubling Deals with Foreign Power-Players, ProPublica and USA Today (Jan. 19, 2017) (online at 
https://projects.propublica.org/trump-conflicts/). 


501 Id. 


5° The Trump Tower Manila Shows Why Trump Can Never Truly Separate Himself from His Brand, 
Washington Post (June 13, 2017) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/the-trump-tower-manila- 
shows-why-trump-can-never-truly-separate-himself-from-his-brand/2017/06/12/2870 1 dfe-3a46-1 1e7-a59b- 
26e0451a96fd_story.html); Pitch for Trump Tower Mumbai Plays Up Connection to Donald Trump, Wall Street 
Journal (July 26, 2017) (online at www.wsj.com/articles/pitch-for-trump-tower-mumbai-plays-up-connection-to- 
donald-trump-1501061401). 


116 


MALAYSIA 


In September 2017, then-President Trump hosted then-Prime Minister of Malaysia, Najib 
Razak, for an official visit at the White House.°™ At the time, the DOJ was seeking to recover 
more than $1 billion in assets that had been stolen from a Malaysian government investment 
fund co-founded and managed by Mr. Razak in one of the largest global corruption scandals to 
date.°°* The Prime Minister and numerous Malaysian officials stayed at the Trump International 
Hotel in Washington, D.C., during the official visit. Officials would return to the hotel for an 
additional stay later that month. Their room charges and amenities totaled $248,962 for the 
month of September 2017.°° It was widely reported that, as part of a broader corruption 
investigation, Prime Minister Razak was under scrutiny by the DOJ at the time he was invited to 
the White House.°°° Commentators noted that then-President Trump’s decision to welcome 
Prime Minister Razak anyway could have been seen as lending credibility to Mr. Razak, who 
was required to call a general election no later than mid-2018 and was expected to run for re- 
election.°”” 


Malaysia’s Emolument Spending at Trump Properties 


Date Location Expenditure Amount 
September 7-15, Trump International Hotel | Stay by former Prime $247,352°° 
2017 (Washington, D.C.) Minister Najib Razak and 

other senior government 
officials 
September 27, 2017 | Trump International Hotel | “Embassy of Malaysia $1,610°° 
(Washington, D.C.) Delegation” 


EMOLUMENTS PAID BY MALAYSIA $248,962 
(2017-2020) 


5° Trump Welcomes Najib Razak, the Malaysian Leader, as President, and Owner of a Fine Hotel, New 
York Times (Sept. 12, 2017) (online at www nytimes.com/2017/09/12/world/asia/trump-najib-razak-malaysia- 
white-house html). 


5° Malaysian Leader, Under Corruption Cloud, Will Meet with Trump, New York Times (Sept. 9, 2017) 
(online at www.nytimes.com/2017/09/09/world/asia/malaysia-najib-razak-1mdb html). 


5° MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008052 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00008094. 


5% Trump Welcomes Najib Razak, the Malaysian Leader, as President, and Owner of a Fine Hotel, New 
York Times (Sept. 12, 2017) (online at www nytimes.com/2017/09/12/world/asia/trump-najib-razak-malaysia- 
white-house html); Trump To Meet Malaysia's Leader As Probe Against Him Deepens, NPR (Sept. 12, 2017) 
(online at www.npr.org/2017/09/12/55035298 1 /trump-to-meet-malaysias-leader-as-probe-against-him-deepens). 


3°7 Trump Meeting with Malaysian Prime Minister Comes Under Scrutiny, PBS News Hour (Sept. 12, 
2017) (online at www.pbs.org/newshout/world/trump-meeting-malaysian-prime-minister-comes-scrutiny); Trump 
Meets with Malaysia’s Prime Minister, NBC News (Sept. 12, 2017) (online at www.nbcnews.com/news/us- 
news/trump-meet-malaysia-s-prime-minister-n800601). 


5°8 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008052 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00008094; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008012. 


5° MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018425. 


117 


1Malaysia Development Berhad Corruption Scandal 


On September 12, 2017, then-Prime Minister Razak visited then-President Trump at the 
White House. At the time of the meeting, it was publicly known that Mr. Razak and members of 
his family were under investigation by the DOJ in connection with the now notorious corruption 
scandal involving the misappropriation of billions of dollars from a Malaysian sovereign wealth 
fund called 1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB).°!° Mr. Razak had been under “unrelenting 
pressure at home” ahead of his anticipated re-election campaign, according to the New York 
Times, which described the White House visit as a “major victory” for him.°!'! The Center for 
Strategic and International Studies similarly noted that no Malaysian Prime Minister had visited 
the White House since 2004 and explained that: 


[T]he Malaysian prime minister will likely be happy if his visit demonstrates back in 
Malaysia—where he faces elections before August 2018—that the U.S. investigation is 
really a relatively minor issue and that he can still be welcomed into Trump’s Oval Office 
as an important Southeast Asian leader.°!” 


By the time the two leaders met, the DOJ’s investigation into 1MDB—which would 
become its “largest ever kleptocracy” case—had been underway for more than a year.*!> The 
DOJ alleged that Mr. Razak and others associated with the fund had illegally siphoned off more 
than $3.5 billion from 1MDB beginning not long after it was created in 2009—shortly after Mr. 
Razak, a co-founder of the fund, took office.*!* It would later be found that more than $4.5 
billion had been stolen from 1MDB, which the DOJ determined to have been laundered through 
shell companies and financial institutions worldwide, many of which were in the United 
States.*!> 


5!0 Trump Meets Malaysia Leader Under Investigation by His Justice Department, CNN (Sept. 12, 2017) 
(online at www.cnn.com/2017/09/12/politics/trump-malaysia-prime-minister/index html). 


5"! Trump Welcomes Najib Razak, the Malaysian Leader, as President, and Owner of a Fine Hotel, New 
York Times (Sept. 12, 2017) (online at www nytimes.com/2017/09/12/world/asia/trump-najib-razak-malaysia- 
white-house html); Malaysian Leader, Under Corruption Cloud, Will Meet with Trump, New York Times (Sept. 9, 
2017) (online at www.nytimes.com/2017/09/09/world/asia/malaysia-najib-razak- 1mdb.html). 


5!2 Center for Strategic and International Studies, Trump-Najib Meeting Gives Malaysia-U.S. Relations Shot 
of Adrenaline (Sept. 14, 2017) (online at www.csis.org/analysis/trump-najib-meeting-gives-malaysia-us-relations- 
shot-adrenaline). 


513 Explainer: Malaysia’s Ex-PM Najib And the Multi-Billion Dollar IMDB Scandal, Reuters (Aug. 23, 
2022) (online at www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/malaysias-ex-pm-najib-multi-billion-dollar- 1 mdb-scandal- 
2022-08-23/); Malaysian Leader, Under Corruption Cloud, Will Meet with Trump, New Y ork Times (Sept. 9, 2017) 
(online at www.nytimes.com/2017/09/09/world/asia/malaysia-najib-razak- 1 mdb.html). 


5!4 Complaint, United States of America v. “The Wolf of Wall Street” Motion Picture etc., No. CV 16-16- 
5362 (C.D. Cal. July 20, 2016) (online at www.justice.gov/archives/opa/page/file/877 166/download); Former 
Malaysian Leader to Serve Prison Term After Final Appeal Is Thrown Out, CNN (Aug. 23, 2022) (online at 
www.cnn.com/2022/08/23/asia/malaysia-najib-razak-prison-intl/index html). 


515 Department of Justice, Press Release: Over $1 Billion in Misappropriated IMDB Funds Now 
Repatriated to Malaysia (Aug. 5, 2021) (online at www.justice.gov/opa/pr/over-|-billion-misappropriated-1mdb- 
funds-now-repatriated-malaysia); /MDB Scandal Explained: A Tale of Malaysia’s Missing Billions, The Guardian 
(July 28, 2020) (online at www.theguardian.com/world/2018/oct/25/1mdb-scandal-explained-a-tale-of-malaysias- 
missing-billions). 


118 


Beginning in 2016, the DOJ filed 41 civil forfeiture actions in an effort to recover the 
more than $1 billion in stolen 1MDB assets that were known to have been laundered in violation 
of U.S. law.°'® Of the assets the DOJ identified as having been laundered at the time, more than 
$730 million had allegedly been deposited into accounts that belonged to Mr. Razak, who was 
not named in the DOJ’s case but was referenced as “Malaysian Official 1” in its complaints. The 
billions in stolen funds were allegedly used to purchase fine art, a yacht, and luxury American 
properties, and even to invest in the film “The Wolf of Wall Street.” This was quite plainly far 
from the intended purpose of the sovereign wealth fund, which the DOJ pointed out was 
“ostensibly created ... for the economic benefit of the Malaysian people.”°!’ The DOJ also 
brought several highly-publicized criminal actions against individuals and a financial institution 
based on their participation in the scheme.°!® 


Against the backdrop of the IMDB scandal, then-Prime Minister Razak used his 
September 2017 meeting with President Trump to paint a positive picture of the country’s 
investments in the United States, which garnered praise from Mr. Trump. Mr. Razak bragged 
that a Malaysian pension fund and a sovereign wealth fund—separate from the one he was 
accused of looting—were investing billions of dollars in the U.S. economy. Then-President 
Trump, in turn, said it was a “great honor’ to host Mr. Razak and “his very distinguished 
delegation” as “Malaysia is a massive investor in the United States in the form of stocks and 
bonds.” The pair avoided any mention of the then-pending DOJ investigation.*!” 


Malaysian Human Rights Violations 


At the time of the September 2017 meeting with then-President Trump, then-Prime 
Minister Razak’s human rights record was also under scrutiny. By 2017, Mr. Razak had become 
an increasingly autocratic ruler, with Human Rights Watch decrying the “increased arrests of 


516 Department of Justice, Press Release: Over $1 Billion in Misappropriated IMDB Funds Now 
Repatriated to Malaysia (Aug. 5, 2021) (online at www.justice.gov/opa/pr/over-1-billion-misappropriated-1mdb- 
funds-now-repatriated-malaysia ). 


5!7 Complaint, United States of America v. “The Wolf of Wall Street” Motion Picture etc., No. CV 16-16- 
5362 (C.D. Cal. July 20, 2016) (online at www.justice.gov/archives/opa/page/file/877 166/download); Malaysian 
Leader, Under Corruption Cloud, Will Meet with Trump, New York Times (Sept. 9, 2017) (online at 
www nytimes.com/2017/09/09/world/asia/malaysia-najib-razak-1mdb.html); Explainer: Malaysia’s Ex-PM Najib 
and the Multi-Billion Dollar IMDB Scandal, Reuters (Aug. 23, 2022) (online at www.reuters.com/world/asia- 
pacific/malaysias-ex-pm-najib-multi-billion-dollar- 1 mdb-scandal-2022-08-23/). 


518 Department of Justice, Press Release: Former Goldman Sachs Investment Banker Convicted in Massive 
Bribery and Money Laundering Scheme (Apr. 8, 2022) (online at www.justice.gov/usao-edny/pr/former-goldman- 
sachs-investment-banker-convicted-massive-bribery-and-money-laundering); Department of Justice, Press Release: 
Goldman Sachs Charged in Foreign Bribery Case and Agrees to Pay Over $2.9 Billion (Oct. 22, 2020) (online at 
www.justice.gov/opa/pr/goldman-sachs-charged-foreign-bribery-case-and-agrees-pay-over-29-billion). 


5!° Trump Welcomes Najib Razak, the Malaysian Leader, as President, and Owner of a Fine Hotel, New 
York Times (Sept. 12, 2017) (online at www nytimes.com/2017/09/12/world/asia/trump-najib-razak-malaysia- 
white-house html); From Trump Hotel Lobby to White House, Malaysian Prime Minister Gets VIP Treatment, 
Washington Post (Sept. 12, 2017) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/from-trump-hotel-lobby-to-white- 
house-malaysian-prime-minister-gets-vip-treatment/2017/09/12/1b296f54-97d1-1 1e7-87fc- 
c3f7ee4035c9_story.html). 


119 


government critics, expanded restrictions on peaceful assembly, and continued impunity for 
police abuses” in Malaysia.°”° In particular, then-Prime Minister Razak was jailing individuals 
who commented on the IMDB scandal. Human Rights Watch found: 


Throughout 2016, Malaysian authorities used the Communications and Multimedia Act 
(CMA) and the Sedition Act to arrest those criticizing the administration of Prime 
Minister Najib Razak, commenting on the government’s handling of the 1 Malaysia 
Development Berhad (1MDB) corruption scandal, or making comments on social media 
deemed ‘insulting’ to Najib or to Malaysia’s royalty.™”! 


Experts and human rights groups warned that then-Prime Minister Razak’s visit to the 
White House was a public relations coup for him, with one commentator noting that Mr. Razak 
“can tell Malaysians that the [MDB is a non-issue and that the opposition’s message that he is 
unwelcome by world leaders is not true,” while another predicted that “Najib will use this White 
House visit to burnish his credentials going into next year’s election in Malaysia, and redouble 
his repression of critics using the stamp of approval from this visit.”>7? 


Emoluments Paid by Malaysia to Trump-Owned Businesses 


In the days before and after the White House meeting, from September 7, 2017, to 
September 15, 2017, a Malaysian delegation including then-Prime Minister Razak stayed at the 
Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., and were charged a “direct bill” of $247,352. 
Mr. Razak stayed in the hotel’s presidential suite, which was billed at $10,000 per night. Costs 
accrued by then-Prime Minister Razak alone totaled $44,562 over three nights and four days.*”7 


Part of the bill for Mr. Razak’s stay is excerpted below:>74 


509 80965866-1 Razak , Mr. Najib Tun Abdul 


2/2017 101000 Room Charge 
4912/2017 723207 DC Occupancy Sales Tax 
9/12/2017 101800 Miscellaneous Rooms Furniture Movement (Dressing Room) for embassy of Malaysia- 
charge per 
17 723207 DC Occupancy Sales Tax 


17 853201 In Room Dining Lunch 20170912 132807 5278 7104/0024/0024/5278/0000/Lunch 
17 851200 In Room Dining F&B Tax 
10% 


In Room Dining F&B Tax 
10% 
In Room Dining Lunch 20170912 132955 5288 227104/0024'0024/5286/0000/Lunch 


520 Human Rights Watch, Malaysia: Rights Decline Under Najib (Jan. 12, 2017) (online at 
www hrw.org/news/2017/01/12/malaysia-rights-decline-under-najib). 


521 Td. 


522 Trump Meeting with Malaysian Prime Minister Comes Under Scrutiny, PBS News Hour (Sept. 12, 
2017) (online at www.pbs.org/newshour/world/trump-meeting-malaysian-prime-minister-comes-scrutiny); Trump 
Meets with Malaysia’s Prime Minister, NBC News (Sept. 12, 2017) (online at www.nbcnews.com/news/us- 
news/trump-meet-malaysia-s-prime-minister-n800601). 


523 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008052 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00008094. 


4 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT-COMMITTEE-00008081. 


120 


Among the numerous charges for amenities Mr. Razak accrued during his stay at the 
Trump International Hotel were a $750 charge for “Furniture Movement (Dressing Room)” and a 
charge of $1,500 for a “Personal Trainer.” Mr. Razak also spent thousands of dollars to have a 
butler assist in serving multiple meals.**° The Malaysian delegation’s lavish spending in mid- 
September 2017 at the Trump International Hotel caused a 70% jump in the hotel’s average 
nightly room revenue—increasing to $97,193 for the nights of September 7 through September 
14 compared to $56,635 for other nights in September 2017.°*° 


Later that same month, on September 27, 2017, the “Embassy of Malaysia Delegation” 
would return to the hotel and rent an additional four rooms at a cost of $1,610.>”’ 


Adding to the hotel’s revenue during the Malaysian delegation’s mid-September stay was 
$9,272 that was spent by the U.S. Secret Service on rooms for the detail assigned to protect the 
delegation. The Secret Service’s room block included multiple rooms that were booked at $650 
per night—more than double the government’s $231 per diem lodging rate for Washington, 
D.c.*” 


Lobbyist Spending 


In addition to Malaysian government officials, Elliott Broidy, a former top fundraiser for 
Mr. Trump who was lobbying the Trump Administration on behalf of Malaysian interests as an 
unregistered foreign agent, also stayed at the Trump International Hotel four times during 
September 2017, including four nights during a Malaysian delegation’s visit in mid-September, 
and again on the night of September 27, when a Malaysian delegation again stayed at the 
property. In total, Mr. Broidy was charged $5,345 for rooms at the Trump International Hotel 
during September 2017.°? His associate, Nickie Lum Davis, who was working with him on 
behalf of Malaysia, also stayed at the hotel during part of the Malaysian delegation’s mid- 
September stay and was charged $1,155 for her stay.°*° 


525 Td. 


526 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018254 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018452. 


527 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018425. 


528 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018309; MAZAR-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018318; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018337; General Services Administration, FY 17 Per Diem 
Rates (online at www.gsa.gov/travel/plan-book/per-diem-rates/per-diem-files). Expenditures by the U.S. Secret 
Service have been redacted from the documents made public with this report out of an abundance of caution given 
the sensitivity of such information. 


*9 Elliott Broidy Pleads Guilty in Foreign Lobbying Case, New York Times, Oct. 20, 2020 (online at 
www nytimes.com/2020/10/20/us/politics/elliott-broidy-foreign-lobbying.html); Department of Justice, Press 
Release: Elliott Broidy Pleads Guilty for Back-Channel Lobbying Campaign to Drop IMDB Investigation and 
Remove a Chinese Foreign National (Oct. 20, 2020) (online at www.justice.gov/opa/pr/elliott-broidy-pleads-guilty- 
back-channel-lobbying-campaign-drop-1mdb-investigation-and); MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018254 to MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018452. 


S3°MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018303; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018311; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018320; Department of Justice, Press Release: Hawaii 
Businesswoman Pleads Guilty to Facilitating Back-Channel Lobbying Campaign to Drop 1MDB Investigation and 
Remove a Foreign National to China (Aug. 31, 2020) (online at www.justice.gov/opa/pr/hawaii-businesswoman- 


121 


Mr. Broidy was also being paid millions by Malaysian financier Low Taek Jho, a fugitive 
whom the DOJ has charged with orchestrating the IMDB scheme, to lobby the Trump 
Administration to close the investigation into 1MDB—an arrangement Mr. Broidy concealed 
from authorities.°>' In October 2020, Mr. Broidy pled guilty to conspiring to violate FARA in 
connection with his undisclosed lobbying work for Malaysia.** As of the date of this report, Mr. 
Low remains a fugitive after being charged in Malaysia and the United States for his alleged role 
in the IMDB scheme.°** 


The DOJ press release announcing Mr. Broidy’s guilty plea detailed his efforts to 
persuade the Trump Administration to end its IMDB investigation, noting that Mr. Broidy had, 
among other actions, “provided talking points to the Secretary of State referencing the 1MDB 
investigation in advance of a meeting between the Secretary of State and the Malaysian Prime 
Minister in August 2017,” the month before Mr. Razak’s visit with President Trump. The press 
release further explained that Mr. Broidy had “pushed the White House Chief of Staff for a golf 
game between the President and the Malaysian Prime Minister to allow the Malaysian Prime 
Minister to raise [a] resolution of the 1MDB investigation.”*** 


In August 2020, Ms. Lum Davis also pled guilty for her role in facilitating the 
unregistered lobbying campaign to end the 1MDB investigation, for which she too was paid 
millions of dollars.°*° 


The effort by Mr. Broidy and his Malaysian co-conspirators to end the DOJ’s pursuit of 
the IMDB funds ultimately failed. As of August 2021, the DOJ had successfully repatriated 
more than $1.2 billion to the Malaysian people.**° The Malaysian government prosecuted Mr. 


pleads-guilty-facilitating-back-channel-lobbying-campaign-drop-1mdb). 


33! Elliott Broidy Pleads Guilty in Foreign Lobbying Case, New York Times (Oct. 20, 2020) (online at 
www nytimes.com/2020/10/20/us/politics/elliott-broidy-foreign-lobbying.html); Malaysia in Talks to Bring Back 
IMDB-Linked Fugitive Jho Low, Reuters (May 5, 2023) (online at www reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/malaysia- 
talks-bring-back-1mdb-linked-fugitive-jho-low-pm-2023-05-05/). 


532 Department of Justice, Press Release: Elliott Broidy Pleads Guilty for Back-Channel Lobbying 
Campaign to Drop 1MDB Investigation and Remove a Chinese Foreign National (Oct. 20, 2020) (online at 
www.justice.gov/opa/pr/elliott-broidy-pleads-guilty-back-channel-lobbying-campaign-drop- 1 mdb-investigation- 
and). 


533 Malaysia in Talks to Bring Back IMDB-Linked Fugitive Jho Low, Reuters (May 5, 2023) (online at 
www reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/malaysia-talks-bring-back-1mdb-linked-fugitive-jho-low-pm-2023-05-05/); 
Elliott Broidy Pleads Guilty in Foreign Lobbying Case, New York Times (Oct. 20, 2020) (online at 
www nytimes.com/2020/10/20/us/politics/elliott-broidy-foreign-lobbying.html). 


534 Department of Justice, Press Release: Elliott Broidy Pleads Guilty for Back-Channel Lobbying 
Campaign to Drop IMDB Investigation and Remove a Chinese Foreign National (Oct. 20, 2020) (online at 
www .justice.gov/opa/pr/elliott-broidy-pleads-guilty-back-channel-lobbying-campaign-drop- 1 mdb-investigation- 
and). 


535 Department of Justice, Press Release: Hawaii Businesswoman Pleads Guilty to Facilitating Back- 
Channel Lobbying Campaign to Drop 1MDB Investigation and Remove a Foreign National to China (Aug. 31, 
2020) (online at www.justice.gov/opa/pr/hawaii-businesswoman-pleads-guilty-facilitating-back-channel-lobbying- 
campaign-drop-1mdb). 


536 Department of Justice, Press Release: Over $1 Billion in Misappropriated IMDB Funds Now 
Repatriated to Malaysia (Aug. 5, 2021) (online at www.justice.gov/opa/pr/over- 1 -billion-misappropriated-1mdb- 


122 


Razak for his role in the 1MDB scandal, and in August 2022, he was ordered to begin serving a 
12-year prison sentence for his conviction on criminal charges related to IMDB. According to 
Reuters, officials in Malaysia found that Razak ultimately “received more than $1 billion 
traceable to 1MDB.”**” 


President Trump pardoned Mr. Broidy shortly before leaving office.*** He did not pardon 
Ms. Lum Davis, who was sentenced to two years in prison in January 2023.°*? 


funds-now-repatriated-malaysia). 

37 Explainer: Malaysia’s Ex-PM Najib and the Multi-Billion Dollar IMDB Scandal, Reuters (Aug. 23, 
2022) (online at www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/malaysias-ex-pm-najib-multi-billion-dollar- 1 mdb-scandal- 
2022-08-23/). 

338 With Hours Left in Office, Trump Grants Clemency to Bannon and Other Allies, New York Times (May 
5, 2021) (online at www.nytimes.com/2021/01/20/us/politics/trump-pardons html). 


539 Department of Justice, Press Release: Businesswoman Sentenced for Facilitating Unregistered 
Lobbying Campaign in Exchange for Approximately $3 Million (Jan. 19, 2023) (online at 
www.justice.gov/opa/pr/businesswoman-sentenced-facilitating-unregistered-lobbying-campaign-exchange- 
approximately-3). 


123 


TURKEY 


Donald Trump entered the presidency with significant and lucrative existing business 
interests in Turkey. Moreover, the records produced to the Committee by Mazars indicate that 
after the Trump presidency began, the Turkish government repeatedly patronized Trump-owned 
properties in the United States. For two expenditures made by Turkey—both in May 2017—the 
records provided by Mazars fail to show the specific dates, purposes, or amounts of the 
expenditures. Notably, these expenditures coincided with a visit by the Turkish President, Recep 
Tayyip Erdogan, to the White House to meet with President Trump. Separately, the Mazars 
records show that the Governor of the Central Bank of Turkey stayed at the Trump International 
Hotel in Washington, D.C. in October 2017, spending $1,894. 


As President, Donald Trump—and senior officials in his Administration—took several 
official actions and positions favorable to the Turkish government. For example, in 2018, then- 
President Trump reportedly assured President Erdogan that the DOJ would terminate an 
investigation into the Turkish state-owned financial institution Tiirkiye Halk Bankasi, also 
known as Halkbank, over allegations of money laundering and evasion of U.S. sanctions on Iran. 
Trump Administration officials pressured the U.S. Attorney leading the investigation and 
prosecution to drop the charges.>4° In addition, President Trump remained silent when President 
Erdogan’s bodyguards assaulted U.S. citizens who were protesting the policies of the Turkish 
government during President Erdogan’s May 2017 visit to the United States.*! 


Turkey’s Emolument Spending at Trump Properties 


Date Location Event Amount 
October 11-14, 2017 | Trump International Hotel | Stay by Murat $1,894°” 
(Washington, D.C.) Cetinkaya, Governor, 
Central Bank of Turkey 


In December 2015, Donald Trump stated the following about his relationship with 
Turkey during an appearance on Steve Bannon’s radio program: “I have a little conflict of 
interest because I have a major, major building in Istanbul.” He explained, “It’s called Trump 
Towers—two towers, instead of one. ... And I’ve gotten to know Turkey very well. They’re 
amazing people. They’re incredible people. They have a strong leader.”°*? In 2012, Mr. 


34° Turkish Bank Case Showed Erdogan’s Influence with Trump, New York Times (Oct. 29, 2020) (online 
at www.nytimes.com/2020/10/29/us/politics/trump-erdogan-halkbank html). 


341 Presidential Silence After an Attack on American Soil, The Atlantic (Jan. 13, 2019) (online at 
www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2019/01/trump-stands-by-while-erdogan-orders-attack-protesters/580093/); 
Erdogan Security Forces Launch ‘Brutal Attack’ on Washington Protesters, Officials Say, New York Times (May 
17, 2017) (online at www.nytimes.com/2017/05/17/us/turkish-embassy-protest-dc html). 


54 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018548; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018559; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018568; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018576. 


58 Donald Trump—December 1, 2015, Breitbart News Daily (Dec. 1, 2015) (online at 
https://soundcloud.com/breitbart/breitbart-news-daily-donald-trump-december-1-2015); The Daily 202: Trump’s 
‘Little Conflict of Interest’ in Turkey Draws Scrutiny as He Offers Erdogan a Generous Deal, Washington Post 


124 


Erdogan, then Turkey’s Prime Minister, cut the ribbon opening Trump Towers Istanbul. Donald 
Trump attended this ribbon cutting, as did his daughter, Ivanka Trump, and her husband, Jared 
Kushner.*“* On April 20, 2012, Ivanka Trump thanked Mr. Erdogan for his support, posting on 
social media: “Thank you Prime Minister Erdogan for joining us yesterday to celebrate the 
launch of #TrumpTowers Istanbul!’”>* 


Years later, as Donald Trump prepared to take office, it was Mr. Erdogan who sought 
access to Mr. Trump and his confidantes, with Turkey investing heavily in lobbying the Trump 
Administration from its outset. Reportedly, the day before Donald Trump’s inauguration, 
Turkey’s foreign minister, Mevliit Cavusoglu, met with Trump fundraiser and D.C. lobbyist, 
Brian Ballard, in Washington, D.C. According to NBC, this meeting “marked the start of 
Turkey’s ambitious lobbying of the Trump administration.”*° Mr. Ballard entered into a 
profitable lobbying agreement with the Turkish Government that took effect on May 15, 2017— 
the day before President Erdogan visited President Trump at the White House (as discussed in 
more detail below).>4” 


Mr. Ballard, a Republican National Committee finance vice chair and Trump super-donor, 
had built his firm around his personal connections to President Trump.*4* He was reportedly 
“closer to the president than perhaps any other lobbyist in town” and “parlayed that relationship 
into a booming business helping clients get their way with the Trump administration.”*4? Mr. 
Ballard was a frequent patron of Mr. Trump’s Mar-a-Lago Club, reportedly having joined Mar-a- 
Lago midway through Mr. Trump’s term after Mr. Trump noticed he was not a member.>*°? 


(Nov. 13, 2019) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/paloma/daily-202/2019/1 1/13/daily-202- 
trump-s-little-conflict-of-interest-in-turkey-draws-scrutiny-as-he-offers-erdogan-a-generous- 
deal/Sdcb903288e0fa 1 Offd20dcb/). 


544 Td. 


54 Tvanka Trump (@IvankaTrump), X (formerly Twitter) (Apr. 20, 2012) (online at 
https://twitter.com/IvankaTrump/status/193337302066540545). 


46 Behind Trump’s Turkish “Bromance”: Lev Parnas, Oligarchs and a Lucrative Lobbying Deal, NBC 
News (Sept. 19, 2020) (online at www.nbcnews.com/politics/donald-trump/behind-trump-s-turkish-bromance-lev- 
parnas-oligarchs-lucrative-lobbying-n 1240374). 


547 Td. ; Department of Justice, Supplemental Statement Pursuant to the Foreign Agents Registration Act of 
1938, as Amended (May 19, 2017) (online at https://efile. fara.gov/docs/6415-Exhibit-AB-20170519-3.pdf). Behind 
Trump's Turkish “Bromance’”’: Lev Parnas, Oligarchs And A Lucrative Lobbying Deal, NBC News (Sept. 19, 2020) 
(online at www nbcnews.com/politics/donald-trump/behind-trump-s-turkish-bromance-lev-parnas-oligarchs- 
lucrative-lobbying-n1240374); Turkish Bank Case Showed Erdogan ’s Influence With Trump, New York Times (Oct. 
29, 2020) (online at www.nytimes.com/2020/10/29/us/politics/trump-erdogan-halkbank html); The White House, 
Press Release: Remarks by President Trump and President Erdogan of Turkey in Joint Statement (May 16, 2017) 
(online at https://tr.usembassy. gov/remarks-president-trump-president-erdogan-turkey-joint-statement/). 


548 Ballard Partners, Brian D. Ballard (online at https://ballardpartners.com/the-team/brian-d-ballard/); The 
Center for Public Integrity, Florida Lobbyist Turning Trump Ties into Mega-Millions (July 5, 2017) (online at 
https://publicintegrity.org/politics/florida-lobbyist-turning-trump-ties-into-mega-millions/). 


54 The Most Powerful Lobbyist in Trump’s Washington, Politico, (Apr. 2, 2018) (online at 
www.politico.com/magazine/story/2018/04/02/most-powerful-lobbyist-in-truamp-washington-217759). 


58° The Swamp That Trump Built, New York Times (Oct. 10, 2020) (online at 
www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/10/10/us/trump-properties-swamp html). 


125 


Moreover, the activities of Mr. Ballard’s clients financially benefited the President, as officials 
from client governments such as Turkey and Kosovo made payments to then-President Trump’s 
businesses as detailed in this report, in violation of the Constitution’s Foreign Emoluments 
Clause.**! 


As noted, on May 16, 2017, then-President Trump hosted President Erdogan at the White 
House for “their first face-to-face encounter since Trump took office.” President Erdogan 
expressed optimism about Mr. Trump’s presidency.°? In public remarks with President Trump, 
President Erdogan stated, as translated: “Of course, President Trump’s recent election victory 
has led to the awakening of a new set of aspirations and expectations and hopes in our region. 
And we know that, by the help of the new U.S. administration, these hopes will not be lost in 
vain.”°>> 


After meeting with President Trump, President Erdogan went to the Turkish 
Ambassador’s residence in Washington, D.C., where his security detail violently charged a group 
of human rights protesters outside the residence. The Turkish security detail injured 11 
protesters and assaulted two Secret Service agents in what police described as “‘a brutal 
attack.”°°4 Republican lawmakers called the security forces’ actions an “affront to the United 
States,” and the House of Representatives voted 397-0 in favor of a resolution calling for any 
Turkish security official who directed or participated in efforts by Turkish security forces to 
suppress peaceful protests outside of the Turkish Ambassador’s residence to be charged and 
prosecuted under U.S. law.**° The State Department, moreover, called in the Ambassador of 
Turkey to discuss the incident.*°° Then-President Trump, however, made no public statements 
condemning the attack.°°” 


55! Td.; The Most Powerful Lobbyist in Trump’s Washington, Politico (Apr. 2, 2018) (online at 
www.politico.com/magazine/story/2018/04/02/most-powerful-lobbyist-in-trump-washington-217759). 


552 ‘4 New Era’ in U.S.-Turkish Relations, The Atlantic (May 16, 2017) (online at 
www.theatlantic.com/news/archive/2017/05/trump-erdogan/526851/). 


53 The White House, Press Release: Remarks by President Trump and President Erdogan of Turkey in 
Joint Statement (May 16, 2017) (online at https://tr.usembassy.gov/remarks-president-trump-president-erdogan- 
turkey-joint-statement/). 


54 Erdogan Security Forces Launch “Brutal Attack” on Washington Protesters, Officials Say, New York 
Times (May 17, 2017) (online at www nytimes.com/2017/05/17/us/turkish-embassy-protest-dc.html). 


585 Id; H.Res 354 (115th Cong.) (2017); See also Presidential Silence After an Attack on American Soil, The 
Atlantic (Jan. 13, 2019) (online at www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2019/01/trump-stands-by-while-erdogan- 
orders-attack-protesters/580093/); See also Trump Says Turkish President Gets “Very High Marks”, Politico (Sept. 
21, 2017) (online at www.politico.com/story/2017/09/2 1/trump-erdogan-turkey-praise-242986). 


586 State Department Summons Turkish Ambassador After Bloody Brawl in D.C., NBC News (May 18, 
2017) (online at www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/state-department-summons-turkish-ambassador-after-bloody- 
brawl-d-c-n761911). 


557 Trump Says Turkish President Gets “Very High Marks,” Politico (Sept. 21, 2017) (online at 
www.politico.com/story/2017/09/2 1/trump-erdogan-turkey-praise-242986); Presidential Silence After an Attack on 
American Soil, The Atlantic (Jan. 13, 2019) (online at www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2019/01/trump-stands- 
by-while-erdogan-orders-attack-protesters/580093/). 


126 


Interference in Halkbank Prosecution 


During former President Trump’s Administration, Turkey found a receptive audience on 
an issue that had for years been one of that country’s key priorities—ending the federal criminal 
investigation of a Turkish state-run financial institution. Reportedly, before Donald Trump was 
elected President, President Erdogan had attempted to pressure the Obama Administration to 
intervene in an ongoing DOJ investigation of Turkey’s state-owned Halkbank for allegedly 
violating U.S. sanctions laws and sending billions of dollars’ worth of gold and cash to Iran. 
President Erdogan reportedly asked then-Vice President Biden to remove both then-U.S. 
Attorney, Preet Bharara, who was leading the investigation in the Southern District of New York 
(SDNY), as well as the judge overseeing the prosecution of Turkish-Iranian gold trader Reza 
Zarrab. The Obama Administration did not take any action to interfere with, or in any way alter, 
the course of the investigation and prosecution.°*® 


Following Donald Trump’s election, the Turkish government and Halkbank initiated 
expensive lobbying efforts to try to persuade the Trump Administration to intervene. In August 
2017, while the investigation into Halkbank by the SDNY was still underway, Halkbank hired 
Ballard Partners to represent it.°°? Public reporting on lobbying records indicates that together, 
the Government of Turkey—which, as noted above had a separate contract with Ballard 
Partners—and Halkbank paid Mr. Ballard’s lobbying firm $4.6 million over two years. Mr. 
Ballard’s firm lobbied officials at the Trump White House and the State Department, Members 
of Congress, and then-President Trump’s personal lawyer, Jay Sekulow.* 


In contrast to the Obama Administration, the Trump Administration signaled an openness 
to intervening in the Halkbank prosecution, consistent with President Erdogan’s wishes. In 
2018, Trump Administration officials reportedly began questioning then-Attorney General Jeff 
Sessions and President Trump’s then-United States Attorney for the SDNY, and Mr. Bharara’s 
successor, Geoffrey Berman, about aspects of the case. One such official was then-Treasury 
Secretary Steven Mnuchin, who, after having been approached himself by Turkish officials, 
including President Erdogan’s son-in-law, Berat Albayrak, reportedly raised questions with Mr. 
Sessions about the size of any potential fine that the prosecutors might seek.°°' As Mr. Berman 


588 Turkish Bank Case Showed Erdogan’s Influence with Trump, New York Times (Oct. 29, 2020) (online at 
www.nytimes.com/2020/10/29/us/politics/trump-erdogan-halkbank.html). 


559 Department of Justice, Supplemental Statement Pursuant to the Foreign Agents Registration Act of 
1938, as Amended (Aug. 28, 2017) (online at https://efile fara.gov/docs/6415-Exhibit-AB-20170828-5.pdf); Turkish 
Bank Hires Lobby Firm with Trump Ties, The Hill (Sept. 1, 2017) (online at https://thehill.com/business-a- 
lobbying/business-a-lobbying/348930-turkish-bank-hires-lobby-firm-with-trump-ties/). 


5°0 Tq, Ballard Partners represented Turkey through November 2018, and Halkbank until its indictment in 
SDNY in October 2019. Behind Trump's Turkish “Bromance”: Lev Parnas, Oligarchs and a Lucrative Lobbying 
Deal, NBC News (Sept. 19, 2020) (online at www.nbcnews.com/politics/donald-trump/behind-trump-s-turkish- 
bromance-lev-parnas-oligarchs-lucrative-lobbying-n1240374); Turkish Bank Case Showed Erdogan ’s Influence with 
Trump, New York Times (Oct. 29, 2020) (online at www.nytimes.com/2020/10/29/us/politics/trump-erdogan- 
halkbank html). 


5°! Turkish Bank Case Showed Erdogan’s Influence with Trump, New York Times (Oct. 29, 2020) (online at 
www.nytimes.com/2020/10/29/us/politics/trump-erdogan-halkbank.html). 


127 


described it, Halkbank “acted as if it had an ace in the hole, or two aces: a friend in the White 
House and a back channel to Main Justice [i.e. the DOJ’s leadership].”°” 


On December 14, 2018, then-President Trump reportedly promised President Erdogan 
that a resolution in the Halkbank investigation was forthcoming—a statement that suggested 
President Trump was interfering in an ongoing investigation and violating the independence of 
the DOJ. According to the account of former National Security Advisor John Bolton, President 
Erdogan presented President Trump with a memo from the law firm representing Halkbank. 
President Trump quickly flipped through the pages and then said that he believed Halkbank was 
innocent.*°? According to Mr. Bolton, “Trump [...] told Erdogan he would take care of things, 
explaining that the Southern District prosecutors were not his people, but were Obama people, a 
problem that would be fixed when they were replaced by his people.”°°* On the same day, the 
DOJ reportedly notified SDNY that Secretary Mnuchin, Secretary of State Pompeo, and the U.S. 
Attorney General’s office would become more involved in the Halkbank case.*® 


According to the New York Times, in December 2018, then-Acting Attorney General 
Matthew Whitaker told then-Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein that he did not want the 
Halkbank case to proceed, despite Mr. Rosenstein’s support for the prosecution. Justice 
Department officials ultimately disregarded Mr. Whitaker’s instruction.*©° 


Attorney General Barr, who succeeded Acting Attorney General Whitaker in February 
2019, reportedly continued the effort to pressure SDNY to drop the charges.*°’ In his memoir, 
Mr. Geoffrey Berman—who had been appointed by the Trump Administration in January 
2018—noted his belief that in pushing to drop the Halkbank case, former Attorney General Barr, 
“appeared to be doing Trump’s bidding.”°°* As Mr. Berman put it: 


Donald Trump was close with the Turkish President, Recep Tayyip Erdogan. Trump had 
a property in Turkey—Trump Towers Istanbul. Erdogan attended the official opening in 
2012. 


5° Geoffrey Berman, Holding the Line (2022) at 261. 


5&3 Trump ’s Inexplicable Crusade to Help Iran Evade Sanctions, Foreign Policy (Jan. 9, 2021) (online at 
https://foreignpolicy.com/2021/01/09/trump-help-iran-evade-sanctions-turkey-halkbank/). 


54 Clash Over U.S. Attorney Who Investigated Trump Associates Sets Off Crisis, New York Times (June 19, 
2020 (online at www.nytimes.com/2020/06/19/nyregion/us-attorney-manhattan-trump html); Turkish Bank Case 
Showed Erdogan '’s Influence with Trump, New York Times (Oct. 29, 2020) (online at 
www.nytimes.com/2020/10/29/us/politics/trump-erdogan-halkbank.html). 


565 Td. 


5°6 Turkish Bank Case Showed Erdogan’s Influence with Trump, New York Times (Oct. 29, 2020) (online 
at www.nytimes.com/2020/10/29/us/politics/trump-erdogan-halkbank html). 


567 Td. 


5°8 Geoffrey Berman’s Big Claims About Trump ’s Justice Department, Washington Post (Sept. 8, 2022) 
(online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2022/09/08/berman-trump-department-justice-organized/); United 
States Attorney’s Office, Southern District of New York, Press Release: Attorney General Jeff Sessions Appoints 
Geoffrey S. Berman As Interim United States Attorney (Jan. 3, 2018) (online at www.justice.gov/usao- 
sdny/pr/attorney-general-jeff-sessions-appoints-geoffrey-s-berman-interim-united-states). 


128 


The Turkish President adamantly objected to all aspects of our probe and did not want the 
bank charged. 


He made the case directly to Trump. 
Barr, always eager to please his boss, appeared to be doing Trump’s bidding.°™ 


In reporting on this matter, the New York Times observed: “Mr. Trump’s sympathetic 
response to Mr. Erdogan was especially jarring because it involved accusations that the bank had 
undercut Mr. Trump’s policy of economically isolating Iran, a centerpiece of his Middle East 
plan.”°”° 


Former National Security Advisor Bolton provided additional context regarding Mr. 
Trump’s relationship with Erdogan and Halkbank: “It was so idiosyncratic, so personal to 
Trump in the pursuit of personal relationships, that it was very dangerous. And it does look like 
obstruction of justice.”°’! Mr. Bolton further noted that former President Trump “would 
interfere in the regular government process to do something for a foreign leader,” adding, “In 
anticipation of what? In anticipation of another favor from that person down the road.”°” 


Despite the Trump Administration’s apparent campaign to get the Justice Department to 
end the investigation into Halkbank, SDNY filed an indictment against Halkbank in October 
2019.° As Mr. Berman described it: 


Then something unexpected, and, in light of all that occurred previously, bizarre, 
occurred on October 15. Barr called me and said the team should put the Halkbank case 
in the grand jury that day so we could be in a position to indict. 


Apparently, Trump had fallen out with Erdogan.°” 


In June 2020, President Trump fired Mr. Berman. Trump DOJ officials reportedly “cited 
his handling of the Halkbank matter, including his blocking of the proposed global settlement, as 
a key reason for his removal.”°” 


5© Berman, Holding the Line at 258. 


5” Turkish Bank Case Showed Erdogan’s Influence with Trump, New York Times (Oct. 29, 2020) (online 
at www.nytimes.com/2020/10/29/us/politics/trump-erdogan-halkbank html). 


511 Id. 
572 Td. 


573 Department of Justice, Press Release: Turkish Bank Charged in Manhattan Federal Court for its 
Participation in a Multibillion-Dollar Iranian Sanctions Evasion Scheme (Oct. 15, 2019) (online at 
www.justice.gov/usao-sdny/pr/turkish-bank-charged-manhattan-federal-court-its-participation-multibillion-dollar). 


574 Berman, Holding the Line at 276. 
575 Turkish Bank Case Showed Erdogan’s Influence with Trump, New York Times (Oct. 29, 2020) (online at 
www.nytimes.com/2020/10/29/us/politics/trump-erdogan-halkbank.html). 


129 


After charges were brought in October 2019, Halkbank unsuccessfully sought to have the 
case dismissed, arguing that the bank could not be subject to prosecution under the Foreign 
Sovereign Immunities Act (FSIA), which limits the United States’ ability to bring civil cases 
against foreign nations. The bank’s appeal was ultimately reviewed by the U.S. Supreme Court, 
which ruled in April 2023 that Halkbank was not immune from criminal prosecution under FSIA 
because the law applied only to civil cases.°”° The Supreme Court also remanded the case to the 
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit for further consideration of whether Halkbank is 
entitled to immunity under common law.*”” 


Separately, SDNY charged nine individuals, including several employees of Halkbank, 
with crimes related to Halkbank’s scheme. Reza Zarrab ultimately pled guilty to seven counts. 
The former Deputy General Manager of Halkbank was convicted on five counts in January 2018. 
Other defendants became fugitives.*”* 


Spending at Trump Properties by the Turkish Government 


A document provided to the Committee by Mazars indicates that the Embassy of Turkey 
made two expenditures at Trump-owned properties in May 2017—the same month President 
Erdogan made his first visit to then-President Trump at the White House—and the same month 
that President Erdogan’s security detail attacked U.S. protesters and Secret Service agents 
outside the Turkish Embassy. The document shows an account for the “Embassy of Turkey 
Delegation” with a “Start Date” of May 9, 2017, and an account for the “Embassy of Turkey” 
with a “Start Date” of May 23, 2017. Both accounts were identified as “Closed.”*”? The Mazars 
records produced to the Committee do not specify the purposes or amounts of the Turkish 
Embassy’s expenditures, and Chairman Comer’s release of Mazars from its obligation to 
produce responsive documents has prevented the Committee from obtaining further information. 


Records produced to the Committee by Mazars show that Murat Cetinkaya, the Governor 
of the Central Bank of Turkey, stayed at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., 
from October 11 through October 14, 2017, spending $1,894.°°° Mr. Cetinkaya’s name appears 
among the “Accredited Members of the Delegations at the 2017 Annual Meetings” included in 


57° In Prosecution of Turkish Bank, the Supreme Court Issues a Mixed Ruling, New York Times (Apr. 19, 
2023) (online at www.nytimes.com/2023/04/19/us/supreme-court-turkish-bank-halkbank.html); Supreme Court says 
Halkbank Not Immune From U.S. Prosecution for Iran Sanctions Violations Under FSIA, CNBC (Apr. 19, 2023) 
(online at www.cnbc.com/2023/04/19/supreme-court-says-turkey-owned-bank-can-be-prosecuted-for-iran- 
sanctions-violations html). 


3” Turkiye Halk Bankasi A.S. v. United States, 143 S.Ct. 940 (2023). 


578 Department of Justice, Press Release: Turkish Bank Charged in Manhattan Federal Court for its 
Participation in a Multibillion-Dollar Iranian Sanctions Evasion Scheme (Oct. 15, 2019) (online at 
www.justice.gov/usao-sdny/pr/turkish-bank-charged-manhattan-federal-court-its-participation-multibillion-dollar). 


5 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008041. 


580 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE-00018548; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE- 
00018559; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018568; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018576; Turkey ’s President Removes Head of Central Bank, New York Times (July 6, 2019) (online at 
www nytimes.com/2019/07/06/business/erdogan-removes-turkey-governor-central-bank.html). 


130 


the “Summary Proceedings” of the “2017 Annual Meetings of the Boards of Governors” issued 
by the World Bank.**! 


Trump’s Business Interests in Turkey 


Significantly, the payments made to the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., 
by Turkish officials were in addition to the approximately $2.6 million in net income the former 
President reportedly received from 2015 through 2018 from his business operations in Turkey.>* 
In his personal financial disclosures during his time in office, Mr. Trump reported receiving 
royalties worth between $100,001 and $1 million annually on his Trump Marks Istanbul II LLC 
venture.°*? As discussed above, Mr. Trump himself stated that he had “a little conflict of 
interest” with respect to Turkish affairs because of his “major, major building in Istanbul.”>*4 


58! The World Bank, 20/7 Annual Meetings of the Board of Governors Summary Proceedings (Oct. 13-15, 
2017) (online at https://documents 1 .worldbank.org/curated/es/40000 152762099973 1 /pdf/2017-Summary- 
Proceedings-cleared-by- YT-05232018.pdf). 


582 Turkish Bank Case Showed Erdogan’s Influence with Trump, New York Times (Oct. 29, 2020) (online at 
www.nytimes.com/2020/10/29/us/politics/trump-erdogan-halkbank.html). 


583 Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 
278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed May 15, 2018) (online at https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/21154685/trump- 
oge-2018.pdf); Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 
278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed May 15, 2019) (online at https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/2 1154683/trump- 
oge-2019.pdf); Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 
278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed July 31, 2020) (online https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/7012257/President- 
Donald-Trump-2020-financial-disclosure.pdf); Office of Government Ethics, Executive Branch Personnel Public 
Financial Disclosures (OGE Form 278e) (Donald J. Trump) (Filed Jan. 15, 2021) (online at 
https://extapps2.oge.gov/201/Presiden nsf/PAS+Index/6E78B 163F816EF6A852586630075291D/$FILE/Trump,%20 
Donald%20J.%202021Termination%:20278.pdf); What We Know About Trump's Business Empire Trump Towers 
Istanbul, CNN (2018) (online at www.cnn.com/interactive/20 1 8/politics/trump-business-empire/?asset=59). 


584 President Trump Said in 2015 That He Has a ‘Little Conflict of Interest’ in Turkey, TIME (Apr. 19, 
2017) (online at https://time.com/4746348/donald-trump-turkey-conflict-interest/). 


131 


The records produced to the Committee by Mazars show that during the six-month period 


DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO 


between September 2017 and March 2018, representatives of the government of the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo (D.R.C.) and a chairman of a D.R.C. state agency spent $25,171 at the 


Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., over six separate stays. During the same period, 


D.R.C. government officials were engaged in an extensive influence campaign in the U.S. while 
then-D.R.C. President Joseph Kabila—whose term was supposed to have ended in late 2016— 

refused to cede power.°® As experts and policymakers within the international community 
condemned Mr. Kabila for his refusal to hold free and fair elections and for his administration’s 
violent repression of political dissent, the Kabila government spent tens of thousands of dollars 
on hotel stays presumably aimed at securing then-President Donald Trump’s support. 


D.R.C.’s Emolument Spending at Trump Properties 


Date Location Expenditure Amount 
September 10-16, | Trump International Hotel Raymond Tshibanda, $6,439°°° 
2017 (Washington, D.C.) Special Envoy of the 
D.R.C. to the United States 
September 25, | Trump International Hotel Raymond Tshibanda, $1,356°°” 
2017 (Washington, D.C.) Special Envoy of the 
D.R.C. to the United States 
October 12, 2017 | Trump International Hotel Francois Balumuene, $1,600°°* 
(Washington, D.C.) Congolese Ambassador to 
the United States 
November 26, | Trump International Hotel Raymond Tshibanda, $8,638°° 
2017—December (Washington, D.C.) Special Envoy of the 
4, 2017 D.R.C. to the United States 


585 The Postponed DRC Elections: Behind the Tumultuous Politics, Brookings Institution (Nov. 18, 2016) 
(online at www.brookings.edu/blog/africa-in-focus/2016/1 1/18/the-postponed-drc-elections-behind-the-tumultuous- 


politics/); No DRC Leader Gives Up Power Peacefully, So Why Would Joseph Kabila?, The Guardian (Sept. 23, 
2016) (online at www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/23/joseph-kabila-democratic-republic-of-the-congo- 
elections-transfer-power). 

586 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018306; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018315; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018324; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018334; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018343; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018349; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018353; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018451. 


387 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018400. 
588 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018553; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018555. 


589 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018914; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018916; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE-00018919; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018924; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018929; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018937; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_ COMMITTEE-00018942; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018947; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018956. 


132 


December 20-21, | Trump International Hotel Raymond Tshibanda, $1,496°° 
2017 (Washington, D.C.) Special Envoy of the 
D.R.C. to the United States 
March 13-16, | Trump International Hotel | Albert Yuma, Chairman, $5,642>”! 
2018 (Washington, D.C.) Gécamines 
EMOLUMENTS PAID BY D.R.C. $25,171 
(2017-2018) 


In October 2016, as then-President Joseph Kabila was nearing the constitutionally 
mandated end of his final term, he announced that 2016 presidential elections originally expected 
to be held that fall “would be postponed until April 2018.”°°* This announcement appeared to 
ensure that President Kabila would remain in power for at least another 15 months—and raised 
concerns that he might seek to change the D.R.C.’s constitution so that he could retain the 
presidency indefinitely.°’? Then-President Kabila was accused of using force against those who 
opposed his regime and of looting millions in public funds.*** 


The D.R.C.’s shift away from democracy and its repression of dissent provoked alarm in 
the international community.°”> In June 2016, the Obama Administration had already imposed 


5°0 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00019049; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00019052. 


3°! MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00016648; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00016659; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00016671; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00016678. 


5° The Postponed DRC Elections: Behind the Tumultuous Politics, Brookings Institution (Nov. 18, 2016) 
(online at www.brookings.edu/blog/africa-in-focus/2016/11/18/the-postponed-drc-elections-behind-the-tumultuous- 
politics/); No DRC Leader Gives Up Power Peacefully, So Why Would Joseph Kabila?, The Guardian (Sept. 23, 
2016) (online at www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/23/joseph-kabila-democratic-republic-of-the-congo- 
elections-transfer-power). 


°°3 The Postponed D.R.C. Elections: Behind The Tumultuous Politics, Brookings Institution (Nov. 18, 
2016) (online at www.brookings.edu/articles/the-postponed-dre-elections-behind-the-tumultuous-politics/acf); The 
Postponed DRC Elections: What Does The DRC’ Situation Look Like Now?, Brookings Institution (Nov. 22, 2016) 
(online at www.brookings.edu/articles/the-postponed-drc-elections-what-does-the-dres-situation-look-like-now/). 


5°4 UN. Condemns Congo’ Use of Force Against Protesters and Monitors, New York Times (Jan. 23, 
2018) (online at www.nytimes.com/2018/01/23/world/africa/congo-un-protests-kabila html); As President Joseph 
Kabila Digs In, Tensions Rise in Congo, New York Times (Dec. 17, 2016) (online at 
www.nytimes.com/2016/12/17/world/africa/congo-joseph-kabila-corruption.html). See also Document Leak Shows 
Kabila Family, Associates Looted DRC Funds, A\ Jazeera (Nov. 21, 2021) (online at 
www.aljazeera.com/economy/202 1/11/19/document-leak-shows-kabila-family-associates-looted-dre-funds). 
(Describing a 2021 financial document data leak that demonstrated how a “private bank in the Democratic Republic 
of Congo was used to channel at least $138 million of public funds to former President Joseph Kabila’s family and 
associates.” The documents show “that Congo’s central bank sent $94.5 million to entities connected to the Kabilas, 
while tens of millions of dollars arrived from other public institutions, including $20 million from the nation’s state- 
owned mining company Gecamines.”). 


°° Editorial: Obama Should Act on Congo Before It’s Too Late, Washington Post (Nov. 22, 2016) (online 
at www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/global-opinions/obama-should-act-on-congo-before-its-too- 
late/2016/11/22/ec01b41a-b023-11e6-8616-52b15787add0_ story html); U.S. Disappointed Congo Did Not 
Announce Election Calendar, Reuters (Sept. 19, 2016) (online at www reuters.com/article/us-congo-politics-usa/u-s- 
disappointed-congo-did-not-announce-election-calendar-idUSKCN11P22M). 


133 


sanctions on the police chief in D.R.C.’s capital, Kinshasha.°”° Shortly before leaving office, the 
Obama Administration imposed sanctions on several senior government officials in the D.R.C., 
including the Deputy Prime Minister.°?’ 


As it was trying to suppress opposition at home, the Kabila government initiated a multi- 
million dollar lobbying and public relations campaign to court U.S. government officials and win 
over the new Trump Administration.°”® In late 2016—as President Kabila extended his rule—the 
Kabila government reportedly contracted MER Securities and Communications Systems Ltd. 
(MER), an Israeli security firm, to launch a multi-million dollar D.C. lobbying campaign 
designed to influence the Trump Administration. MER had already been aiding the D.R.C.’s 
surveillance and intelligence efforts at home.*”? The D.R.C. government further expanded its 
influence campaign once Trump took office, engaging lobbying firms like the Republican-led 
Livingston Group to help shore up U.S. support amid growing controversy surrounding President 
Kabila.°° 


In July 2017, the U.S. Deputy Ambassador to the United Nations announced that the U.S. 
was “ready to take additional action to sanction those who stand in the way of D.R.C.’s first 
democratic transition of power.”°°! As Voice of America reported, on July 11, 2017, the U.S. 
“threatened to impose further targeted unilateral sanctions on anyone who hinders Democratic 
Republic of Congo’s already delayed preparations for an election to replace President Joseph 
Kabila” after the D.R.C.’s “election commission president said [...] that the vote, originally due 
in November 2016, was unlikely to take place in 2017.”°" 


5° US Imposes Sanctions on Kinshasa Police Chief in DRC, VOA News (June 23, 2016) (online at 
www.voanews.com/a/us-imposes-sanctions-kinshasa-police-chief-dre/3389741.html). 


7 US, EU Sanction DRC Officials for Undermining Democracy, VOA News (Dec. 12, 2016) (online at 
www.voanews.com/a/us-eu-dre-sanctions/3633014 html). 


°°8 Congo's Lobbyists Seek Allies in Washington Amid Election Turmoil, The Hill (June 28, 2017) (online at 
https://thehill.com/business-a-lobbying/business-a-lobbying/339927-congos-lobbyists-seek-allies-in-washington- 
amid/); Congo Inks $5.6 Million Lobbying Deal Amid Election Strife, The Hill (May 1, 2017) (online at 
https://thehill.com/business-a-lobbying/lobbying-hires/33 1385-congo-inks-56-million-lobbying-deal-amid-election- 
strife/). 


5°? How One Company Made It Easier for an Autocrat to Crack Down, Then Lobbied Trump—And Won, 
Buzzfeed (Dec. 30, 2020) (online at www.buzzfeednews.com/article/albertsamaha/joseph-kabila-congo- 
authoritarian-rule-mer); Congo Inks $5.6 million Lobbying Deal Amid Election Strife, The Hill (May 1, 2017) 
(online at https://thehill.com/business-a-lobbying/lobbying-hires/33 1385-congo-inks-56-million-lobbying-deal- 
amid-election-strife/). 


60 Congo’ Lobbyists Seek Allies in Washington Amid Election Turmoil, The Hill (June 28, 2017) (online at 
https://thehill.com/business-a-lobbying/business-a-lobbying/339927-congos-lobbyists-seek-allies-in-washington- 
amid/); Congo Inks $5.6 Million Lobbying Deal Amid Election Strife, The Hill (May 1, 2017) (online at 
https://thehill.com/business-a-lobbying/lobbying-hires/33 1385-congo-inks-56-million-lobbying-deal-amid-election- 
strife/); See also Targets of U.S. Sanctions Hire Lobbyists With Trump Ties to Seek Relief; New York Times (Dec. 10, 
2018) (online at www.nytimes.com/2018/12/10/us/politics/sanctions-lobbyists-usa html); Congo s Lobbyists Seek 
Allies in Washington Amid Election Turmoil, The Hill (June 28, 2017) (online at https://thehill.com/business-a- 
lobbying/business-a-lobbying/339927-congos-lobbyists-seek-allies-in-washington-amid/). 


6°! US Threatens Sanctions on Anyone Delaying DR Congo Vote (July 11, 2017) (online at 
www.aljazeera.com/news/2017/7/1 1/us-threatens-sanctions-on-anyone-delaying-dr-congo-vote). 


62 US Threatens More Sanctions for Hindering Democracy in Congo, VOA News (July 11, 2017) (online 
134 


According to filings with the DOJ pursuant to FARA, the Livingston Group, on behalf of 
MER, arranged a meeting on September 14, 2017, for Mr. Raymond Tshibanda, the Kabila 
government’s Special Envoy to the United States and former Minister for Foreign Affairs, 
International Cooperation, and Francophonie of the D.R.C., and other D.R.C. representatives 
with the Senior Advisor to the Under Secretary of State for Civilian Security, Democracy, and 
Human Rights and a D.R.C. desk officer at the U.S. Department of State.’ The documents 
Mazars produced to the Committee indicate that on the day he met with the State Department 
officials, Mr. Tshibanda stayed at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C. His stay 
that day was the first of four stays by him recorded in the limited documents produced by 
Mazars.°* 


Subsequently, between November 28, 2017, and December 1, 2017, the Livingston 
Group arranged meetings for a D.R.C. delegation—including Mr. Tshibanda and D.R.C.’s 
Ambassador to the United States, Francois Balumuene—with U.S. public officials, former U.S. 
ambassadors and State Department officials, and several Members of Congress.°°° 


In late 2017, Nikki Haley, then-President Trump’s Ambassador to the United Nations, 
visited President Kabila in the Congolese capital, Kinshasa. During her visit, Ambassador Haley 
pushed Kabila to cede power and threatened economic sanctions if he did not do so.°° Then- 
Ambassador Haley had been sharply critical of the conditions in the D.R.C. In an op-ed 
published by CNN, she noted that the country had “never witnessed a democratic, peaceful 
transfer of power.” Earlier in 2017, she had reportedly described the Kabila regime as 
“corrupt and prey[ing] on its citizens.”°°* In late 2017, after Ambassador Haley’s trip to 
Kinshasha, the U.S. imposed sanctions on business interests in the D.R.C.° 


at www. voanews.com/a/us-threatens-more-sanctions-for-hindering-democracy-in-drc/3937904.html). 


603 Department of Justice, Supplemental Statement Pursuant to the Foreign Agents Registration Act of 
1938, as Amended (Nov. 30, 2017) (online at https://efile fara.gov/docs/6428-Supplemental-Statement-20171221- 
1.pdf); Raymond Tshibanda, Congo Envoy, Sees Election Hurdles, Washington Times (July 9, 2017) (online at 
www.washingtontimes.com/news/2017/jul/9/raymond-tshibanda-congo-envoy-sees-election-hurdle/); United 
Nations, Secretary-General Meets Foreign Minister of Democratic Republic of Congo (Sept. 24, 2016) (online at 
https://dam media.un.org/archive/The-Secretary-General-with-H-E--Mr--Raymond-Tshibanda-N-tungamulongo-- 
Foreign-Minister--DEMOCRATIC-REPUBLIC-OF-THE-CONGO--2AM9LOLSRG8Z. html). 


64 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018306. 


6°5 Department of Justice, Supplemental Statement Pursuant to the Foreign Agents Registration Act of 
1938, as Amended (Mar. 31, 2018) (online at https://efile.fara.gov/docs/6344-Supplemental-Statement-20180511- 
4.pdf). According to public filings by the Livingston Group, these meetings were arranged “to discuss recent 
political developments in the DRC [...], economic cooperation and business opportunities between [the United 
States and the DRC], development and humanitarian issues in the DRC, and strategic developments affecting the 
D.R.C. and Central Africa.” 


696 How One Company Made It Easier for an Autocrat to Crack Down, Then Lobbied Trump—And Won, 
Buzzfeed (Dec. 30, 2020) (online at www.buzzfeednews.com/article/albertsamaha/joseph-kabila-congo- 
authoritarian-rule-mer). 


607 Nikki Haley: This Is Why the President Is Sending Me to Africa, CNN (Oct. 22, 2017) (online at 
www.cnn.com/2017/10/21/opinions/un-dre-south-sudan-nikki-haley-opinion/index html). 


698 Nikki Haley Calls for Cuts in U.N. Peacekeeping Funding, NPR (Mar. 30, 2017) (online at 
www.npr.org/2017/03/30/522015640/nikki-haley-calls-for-cuts-in-u-n-peacekeeping-funding). 


6°9 U.S. Department of the Treasury, Press Release: United States Sanctions Human Rights Abusers and 


135 


In March 2018, after hearing from individuals displaced from the D.R.C. and aid workers 
who had traveled there, the United Nations issued a press release warning, “Humanitarian Crisis 
in Democratic Republic of Congo Will Worsen Without Political Transition, End to Violence, 
Speakers Warn Security Council.”°'® In April 2018, the New York Times reported that, “[t]he 
United Nations says challenges to Mr. Kabila’s rule have caused a collapse of political authority, 
leading to fighting that has displaced 4.5 million people.”°!" 


In mid-2018, as MER was reportedly stepping up its efforts to target individuals who held 
sway with the Trump Administration, including Rudy Giuliani.°!? In July 2018, Mr. Giuliani 
attended a cocktail party in Washington, D.C., featuring a speech by Special Envoy Tshibanda. 
After that party, Ambassador Balumuene suggested in a September 2018 interview that the 
D.R.C. was working with Mr. Giuliani to “figure out the [Trump] administration’s position on an 
upcoming presidential election called by Mr. Kabila to avoid threatened sanctions.”°'4 
Ambassador Balumuene stated, ““What I know is that it is possible that Giuliani will let us know 
how to go ahead,” possibly suggesting that Mr. Kabila’s government expected to receive inside 
information from Mr. Giuliani.°!> Ambassador Balumuene later walked that statement back, 
however, claiming he had “never met or spoken to Giuliani.”°!° 


613 


In August 2018, Mr. Kabila announced that he would not run for President in the 
upcoming election, which had finally been scheduled for December of that year.°'’ Publicly, Mr. 
Kabila endorsed Emmanuel Ramazani Shadary, who had been serving as one of three deputy 
prime ministers and interior minister, as his successor.°'* Behind the scenes, however, Mr. 


Corrupt Actors Across the Globe (Dec. 21, 2017) (online at https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm0243). 


610 United Nations, Meetings Coverage, Security Council, 8207th Meeting, AM, Press Release: 
Humanitarian Crisis in Democratic Republic of Congo Will Worsen Without Political Transition, End to Violence, 
Speakers Warn Security Council (Mar. 19, 2018) (online at https://press.un.org/en/2018/sc13253.doc htm). 


611 Despite Millions of Displaced People, Congo Rejects U.N. Aid Effort, New York Times (Apr. 7, 2018) 
(online at www.nytimes.com/2018/04/07/world/africa/congo-kabila-aid html). 


612 How One Company Made It Easier for An Autocrat To Crack Down, Then Lobbied Trump—And Won, 
Buzzfeed (Dec. 30, 2020) (online at www.buzzfeednews.com/article/albertsamaha/joseph-kabila-congo- 
authoritarian-rule-mer). 


613 Td; Targets of U.S. Sanctions Hire Lobbyists with Trump Ties to Seek Relief, New York Times (Dec. 10, 
2018) (online at www.nytimes.com/2018/12/10/us/politics/sanctions-lobbyists-usa html). 


614 Td. 
615 Td. 


616 How One Company Made It Easier for An Autocrat To Crack Down, Then Lobbied Trump—And Won, 
Buzzfeed (Dec. 30, 2020) (online at www.buzzfeednews.com/article/albertsamaha/joseph-kabila-congo- 
authoritarian-rule-mer). 


617 Waiting for Democracy in Congo, Foreign Affairs (Aug. 17, 2018) (online at 
www. foreignaffairs.com/articles/democratic-republic-congo/2018-08-17/waiting-democracy-congo); Joseph Kabila, 
Congo Strongman, Will Step Down After 17 Years in Power, New York Times (Aug. 8, 2018) (online at 
www nytimes.com/2018/08/08/world/africa/joseph-kabila-congo.html). 


618 Emmanuel Ramazani Shadary: Kabila’s Choice for DR Congo President, BBC News (Dec. 18. 2018) 
(online at www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-46447089); Joseph Kabila, Congo Strongman, Will Step Down After 17 
Years in Power, New York Times (Aug. 8, 2018) (online at www nytimes.com/2018/08/08/world/africa/joseph- 


136 


Kabila reportedly “negotiated a secret power-sharing arrangement” with a different candidate: 
Félix Tshisekedi.°!? After the elections were finally held on December 30, 2018, Félix 
Tshisekedi was declared the winner through a process that regional election observers and the 
international community widely viewed as fraudulent.°”° 


On January 22, 2019, a group of U.S. government agencies, including the Department of 
the Treasury, reportedly drafted a statement calling the election “deeply flawed and troubling” 
and concluding that the D.R.C.’s election commission had “failed to live up to the responsibility 
to conduct a fair election reflecting the will of the Congolese people.©! This statement, 
however, was never released.” For reasons that are not clear, the Trump Administration instead 
released a statement that welcomed “the Congolese Constitutional Court’s certification of Félix 
Tshisekedi as the next President” and praised Kabila’s “commitment to becoming the first 
President in DRC history to cede power peacefully through an electoral process.”°” 


29 


In the spring of 2019, the parties of Tshisekedi and Kabila announced “loose plans to 
form a coalition government.”°** According to sources in the parties, Kabila would “choose the 
prime minister and negotiate over cabinet appointments under a power-sharing deal with his 
successor Felix Tshisekedi.” °° 


kabila-congo.html). 


619 How One Company Made It Easier for An Autocrat To Crack Down, Then Lobbied Trump—And Won, 
Buzzfeed (Dec. 30, 2020) (online at www.buzzfeednews.com/article/albertsamaha/joseph-kabila-congo- 
authoritarian-rule-mer). 


620 Mounting Evidence of Fraud in Congo Vote Prompts Rare Rebuke from the African Union, Washington 
Post (Jan. 18, 2019) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/world/mounting-evidence-of-fraud-in-congo-vote- 
prompts-rare-rebuke-from-the-african-union/2019/01/18/3 164c184-1a97-11e9-b8e6-567190c2fd08_ story html). 


®1 How Washington Got on Board with Congo’ Rigged Election, Foreign Policy (Feb. 1, 2019) (online at 
https://foreignpolicy.com/2019/02/01/how-washington-got-on-board-with-congos-rigged-election-drce-tshisekedi- 
kabila-great-lakes/). 


622 Td. 


63 Department of State, Press Release: U.S. Response to Constitutional Court Decision in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo (Jan. 23, 2019) (online at https://2017-2021-translations.state. gov/2019/01/23/u-s-response- 
to-constitutional-court-decision-in-the-democratic-republic-of-the-congo/); See also How One Company Made It 
Easier for An Autocrat To Crack Down, Then Lobbied Trump—And Won, Buzzfeed (Dec. 30, 2020) (online at 
www.buzzfeednews.com/article/albertsamaha/joseph-kabila-congo-authoritarian-rule-mer); How Washington Got on 
Board with Congo’ Rigged Election, Foreign Policy (Feb. 1, 2019) (online at 
https://foreignpolicy.com/2019/02/01/how-washington-got-on-board-with-congos-rigged-election-drc-tshisekedi- 
kabila-great-lakes/). 


64 Congo s Ex-Leader Kabila’s Party to Pick Prime Minister: Sources, Reuters (Mar. 8, 2019) (online at 
www.reuters.com/article/us-congo-politics/congos-ex-leader-kabilas-party-to-pick-prime-minister-sources- 
idUSKCN1QP1V9). 


625 Td. 


137 


Head of State Mining Agency Albert Yuma 


The D.R.C.’s economy is driven by its mining sector, and specifically by mining of the 
country’s substantial reserves of two metals—copper and cobalt.©° Mr. Albert Yuma, former 
Congolese mining magnate and then-head of state mining agency Gécamines, was at the center 
of corruption allegations against the agency, which controls the nation’s copper and cobalt 
reserves.’ Mr. Yuma took control of Gécamines in 2010, reportedly acquiring the post through 
his “political connections.”°** As then-Chairman, he was accused of nepotism, self-dealing, and 
government corruption during his tenure.°”? The State Department warned for years that he 
“abused his position to enrich friends, family members and political allies.”°°° 


In March 2018, Mr. Yuma appeared to be engaged in a lobbying tour of the United States 
to improve his image and stayed for several nights at the Trump International Hotel in 
Washington, D.C. Mr. Yuma also attended meetings arranged by several lobbying firms with 
officials from the World Bank and several U.S. Departments, including the Department of 
Energy. At several of these meetings, he was reportedly accompanied by Gentry Beach, a Texas- 
based hedge fund manager, fundraiser for then-President Trump, and close friend of Donald 
Trump Jr. Mr. Beach reportedly had “been trying to secure a mining deal in Congo, and 
previously invested with Mr. Trump [Jr.] in a mining project there.” In 2018, Mr. Yuma also 
visited and met with Mr. Trump Jr. for a “quick meet-and-greet” at Trump Tower in New York. 
Weeks later, however, the State Department revoked Mr. Yuma’s visa after finding involvement 
by “several senior DRC officials” in “significant corruption related to the DRC’s electoral 
process” and “human rights violations.”°! 


In December 2021, President Tshisekedi fired Mr. Yuma from Gécamines as part of a 
restructuring of the board following the long-standing corruption allegations against him, 
including accusations that he diverted $8.8 billion in mining revenues over the years.°°? 


626 Global Witness, Regime Cash Machine: How the Democratic Republic of Congo's Booming Mining 
Exports Are Failing to Benefit Its People, New Your Times (July 2017) (online at 
https://int.nyt.com/data/documenttools/regime-cash-machine-freeport-and-tfm-big-role/64ef83a98 13262bb/full.pdf). 


627 Td. 


68 Td. See also DRC: Gécamines and the Missing Millions, The Africa Report (June 6, 2022) (online at 
www.theafricareport.com/2 10908/drce-gecamines-and-the-missing-millions/). 


69 Global Witness, Regime Cash Machine: How the Democratic Republic of Congo's Booming Mining 
Exports Are Failing to Benefit Its People, New Your Times (July 2017) (online at 
https://int.nyt.com/data/documenttools/regime-cash-machine-freeport-and-tfm-big-role/64ef83a98 13262bb/full.pdf); 
DRC: Gécamines and the Missing Millions, The Africa Report (June 6, 2022) (online at 
www.theafricareport.com/2 10908/drc-gecamines-and-the-missing-millions/). 


630 Hunt for the “Blood Diamond of Batteries” Impedes Green Energy Push, New York Times (Nov. 19, 
2021) (online at www.nytimes.com/2021/11/29/world/congo-cobalt-albert-yuma-mulimbi.html). 


631 Td. 


632 Former Congo President's Ally Loses Chairmanship of State Mining Company, Reuters (Dec. 2, 2021) 
(online at www reuters.com/markets/commodities/former-congo-presidents-ally-loses-chairmanship-state-mining- 
company-2021-12-03/); Congo Ousts Mining Leader in A Cloud of Corruption Claims, New York Times (Dec. 3, 
2021) (online at www.nytimes.com/202 1/12/03/world/congo-cobalt-albert-yuma-mulimbi.html). 


138 


Emoluments Paid by the D.R.C. to Trump-Owned Businesses 


The Mazars records produced to the Committee show that between September 2017 and 
March 2018, Congolese government officials and the then-chairman of the D.R.C. state-owned 
mining entity Gécamines spent $25,171 at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C. 


The vast majority of these expenditures were incurred by Raymond Tshibanda, then- 
D.R.C President Joseph Kabila’s Special Envoy to the United States. Mr. Tshibanda stayed at the 
hotel twice in September 2017, from November 26 through December 4, 2017, and again at the 
end of December 2017. For these four stays, he spent a combined total of nearly $18,000.°° As 
discussed, Mr. Tshibanda first appears in the documents produced to the Committee by Mazars in 
the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C.’s guest ledger for September 2017. Media 
reports indicate that he also traveled to Washington, D.C., as part of the D.R.C.’s lobbying effort 
earlier in 2017, but because Chairman Comer curtailed Mazars’s document productions to the 
Committee, it is unclear if Mr. Tshibanda stayed at a Trump property during that trip.°*4 


In addition, D.R.C.’s Ambassador to the United States, Francois Balumuene, spent $1,600 
at the Trump International Hotel on October 12, 2017.°° 


The Mazars records produced to the Committee also show that Albert Yuma spent $5,642 
for two adjacent rooms at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., between March 13 
and March 16, 2018.°°° 


633 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018306; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018315; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018324; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018334; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE-00018343; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018349; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018353; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018400; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018451; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018914; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_ COMMITTEE-00018916; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018919; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018924; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018929; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018937; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018942; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE-00018947; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018956; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00019049; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00019052. 


634 Congo's Lobbyists Seek Allies in Washington Amid Election Turmoil, The Hill (June 28, 2017) (online at 
https://thehill.com/business-a-lobbying/business-a-lobbying/339927-congos-lobbyists-seek-allies-in-washington- 
amid/); Congo Inks $5.6 Million Lobbying Deal Amid Election Strife, The Hill (May 1, 2017) (online at 
https://thehill.com/business-a-lobbying/lobbying-hires/33 1385-congo-inks-56-million-lobbying-deal-amid-election- 
strife/); Department of Justice, Supplemental Statement (Oct. 31, 2017) (online at https://efile.fara.gov/docs/6415- 
Supplemental-Statement-20171128-1.pdf). 


635 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018553; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018555. 


66 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00016648; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00016659; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00016671; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00016678. 


139 


ALBANIA 
The records Mazars provided to the Committee show that during the Trump presidency, 


the Prime Minister of Albania, Edi Rama, and his advisors, as well as an Albanian government 
minister, spent approximately $6,000 at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C. 


Albania’s Emolument Spending at Trump Properties 


Date Location Expenditure Amount 
January 18-19, | Trump International Hotel | Dorjan Ducka, Advisor to $1,503°°” 
2018 (Washington, D.C.) Mr. Rama 
March 3-4, 2018 | Trump International Hotel | Edi Rama, Prime Minister $1,158°°* 
(Washington, D.C.) of Albania 
March 3-4, 2018 | Trump International Hotel | Endri Fuga, Advisor to Mr. $1,158°° 
(Washington, D.C.) Rama 
March 3-4, 2018 | Trump International Hotel Keisi Seferi, Advisor to $1,158°° 
(Washington, D.C.) Mr. Rama 
June 24-26, 2018 | Trump International Hotel Damian Gjiknuri, $1,025! 
(Washington, D.C.) Minister of Infrastructure 
and Energy 
EMOLUMENTS PAID BY ALBANIA $6,002 
(2017-2020) 


Albania is a parliamentary democracy, and since September 2013, it has been led by 
Prime Minister Edi Rama, a member of the Socialist Party.” In recent years, Albania has been a 
key NATO ally, an opponent of Russian aggression, and an important player in combatting 
terrorism.° It has also suffered from “pervasive corruption in all branches of government and 
municipal institutions.” 


637 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00028926; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00028930. 


638 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00016568; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00016576. 


69 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00016568; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00016577. 


640 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00016569; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00016577. 


641 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017647; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017657; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017669. 


6#2 Edi Rama Sworn in as Albania PM, Balkan Insight (Sept. 16, 2013) (online at 
https://balkaninsight.com/2013/09/16/edi-rama-sworn-in-as-albania-pm/). 


643 Former FBI Agent's Side Work Puts Bureau Under New Scrutiny, Washington Post (Feb. 13, 2023) 
(online at www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2023/02/13/mcgonigal-albania-deripaska-indictment-fb1/). 


644 U.S. Department of State, 2020 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Albania (Mar. 30, 2021) 
140 


At the time of President Trump’s election, the Albanian opposition party, the center-right 
Democratic Party of Albania, and its former leader Lulzim Basha (whose slogan was “Make 
Albania Great Again”) had accused Prime Minister Rama’s Socialist Party of endemic corruption 
and ties to organized crime.**° The 2017 Albanian parliamentary elections were contentious: in 
the months preceding the election, Albania’s Democratic Party boycotted the Albanian 
parliament and sponsored protests.“ Following Mr. Rama’s electoral victory, opposition groups 
accused him of conspiring with organized crime groups and rigging the vote.’ 


Amidst this rancor and volatility, Albanian political parties turned to K Street to try to 
gain a political advantage in Washington. The three main Albanian parties hired U.S.-based 
lobbyists with close ties to then-President Trump; two of the three parties reportedly funded their 
lobbying services through obscure shell companies with ties to Russian interests.““® Mr. Rama’s 
Socialist Party retained the firm of Brian Ballard—a Trump fundraiser and D.C. lobbyist— at a 
rate of $20,000 a month. His political rival, Mr. Basha, hired Nicholas Muzin, a former aide 
to Senator Ted Cruz who had also advised the Trump campaign. As one Washington lobbyist 
noted, a picture with the U.S. President often translated to political capital: “The fact that 
[foreign politicians] could get a meeting, have a handshake and take a picture that gets 
distributed far and wide back home—that is gold to them. They’! almost do anything to achieve 
that.”®° Accordingly, in the months leading up to the Albanian parliamentary election, Mr. 


(online at www.state.gov/reports/2020-country-reports-on-human-rights-practices/albania/). 


645 The Head of Albania’s Conservative Party Faces Criminal Charges, and an Ex-Trump Aide Is Involved, 
Mother Jones (June 13, 2019) (online at www.motherjones.com/politics/2019/06/the-head-of-albanias-conservative- 
party-faces-criminal-charges-and-an-ex-trump-aide-is-involved/); Thousands of Albanians Call for Edi Rama’s 
Resignation, Al Jazeera (Jan. 27, 2018) (online at www.aljazeera.com/news/2018/1/27/thousands-of-albanians-call- 
for-edi-ramas-resignation). 


646 U.S. Diplomat Tries to Mediate Compromise in Albanian Politics, Associated Press (May 15, 2017) 
(online at www ksl.com/article/44254626/us-diplomat-tries-to-mediate-compromise-in-albanian-politics); How a 
Russian-Linked Shell Company Hired an Ex-Trump Aide to Boost Albania’s Right-Wing Party in D.C., Mother Jones 
(Mar. 6, 2018) (online at www motherjones.com/politics/2018/03/how-a-russian-linked-shell-company-hired-an-ex- 
trump-aide-to-boost-albanias-right-wing-party-in-dc/). 


647 Albania President Cancels Elections, Citing Tense Climate, New York Times (June 9, 2019) (online at 
www.nytimes.com/2019/06/09/world/europe/albania-elections-canceled.html). 


648 How a Mysterious Overseas Shell Company Used a Former GOP Congressman to Lobby Trump and 
Congress, Mother Jones (Apr. 25, 2018) (online at www motherjones.com/politics/2018/04/how-a-mysterious- 
overseas-shell-company-used-a-former-gop-congressman-to-lobby-trump-and-congress/); How a Russian-Linked 
Shell Company Hired an Ex-Trump Aide to Boost Albania’s Right-Wing Party in D.C., Mother Jones (Mar. 6, 2018) 
(online at www motherjones.com/politics/2018/03/how-a-russian-linked-shell-company-hired-an-ex-trump-aide-to- 
boost-albanias-right-wing-party-in-dc/). LSI, the third largest party, funded its lobbying through a Cypriot-shell 
company with ties to Russian oligarch Oleg Deripaska. Deripaska would later pay McGonigal to illegally assist him 
in an effort to get U.S. sanctions lifted. Indictment, 10 (June 13, 2003), United States of America v. Charles F: 
McGonigal, D.D.C. (No. 1:03 CV 00652); Department of Justice, Press Release: Former Special Agent In Charge 
of the New York FBI Counterintelligence Division Pleads Guilty to Conspiring To Violate U.S. Sanctions On Russia 
(Aug. 15, 2023) (online at www.justice. gov/usao-sdny/pr/former-special-agent-charge-new-york-fbi- 
counterintelligence-division-pleads-guilty). 


649 How a Russian-Linked Shell Company Hired an Ex-Trump Aide to Boost Albania’s Right-Wing Party in 
D.C., Mother Jones (Mar. 6, 2018) (online at www.motherjones.com/politics/2018/03/how-a-russian-linked-shell- 
company-hired-an-ex-trump-aide-to-boost-albanias-right-wing-party-in-dc/). 

65° The Swamp That Trump Built, New York Times (Oct. 10, 2020) (online at 


141 


Muzin arranged for Mr. Basha to take a photo with President Trump at a fundraiser. The 
Democratic Party of Albania disseminated the photo widely in an effort to portray a close 
relationship between Mr. Basha and President Trump.°°! 


According to a filing with the DOJ pursuant to FARA, Mr. Ballard continued to lobby on 
behalf of Prime Minister Rama’s party through 2017, by “updat[ing] individuals on current 
events in Albania and discuss[ing] U.S.-Albania bi-lateral relations” with Members of Congress 
and State Department officials.°? 


On the nights of March 3 and March 4, 2018, Albanian Prime Minister Edi Rama stayed 
at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., along with two advisors. Federal 
prosecutors have alleged that on March 4, Mr. Rama dined with Charles McGonigal, a former 
FBI counterintelligence chief, and Agron Neza, a New Jersey businessman who previously 
worked at an Albanian intelligence agency.°* The DOJ determined that Mr. McGonigal had 
previously traveled to Albania to meet with Mr. Rama several times and, by the time of the 
March 4 meeting, Mr. McGonigal had received $225,000 in cash payments from Mr. Neza.°™4 
Mr. McGonigal had also allegedly passed along potentially damaging information about Mr. 
Muzin—the U.S. lobbyist for Mr. Rama’s chief rival—from Mr. Rama’s office to others in U.S. 
law enforcement.°° In late February, less than a week before the McGonigal-Rama meeting, the 
FBI formally opened an investigation into an American lobbyist, thought to be Mr. Muzin, at 
“McGonigal’s request and upon his guidance.”°°° Mr. McGonigal’s work on behalf of Mr. Rama 
and Mr. Neza would later be at the center of a federal criminal case brought against Mr. 
McGonigal in 2022, several years after he left the Bureau. He has since pleaded guilty to one 
count of illegally concealing from the FBI his business activities in Albania.°’ 


www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/10/10/us/trump-properties-swamp html). 


65! Td.; The Head of Albania’s Conservative Party Faces Criminal Charges, and an Ex-Trump Aide is 
Involved, Mother Jones (June 13, 2019) (online at www motherjones.com/politics/2019/06/the-head-of-albanias- 
conservative-party-faces-criminal-charges-and-an-ex-trump-aide-is-involved/). 

652 Department of Justice, Supplemental Statement Pursuant to the Foreign Agents Registration Act of 
1938, as Amended (May 31, 2018) (online at https://efile fara.gov/docs/6415-Supplemental-Statement-20180531- 
2.pdf). 

653 Indictment United States v. McGonigal, No. 1:23 00021 (D.D.C. Jan. 18, 2023) (online at 
www.justice. gov/usao-de/press-release/file/1563516/download); How Prosecutors Say a Top F.B.I. Agent Sold His 


Services Overseas, New York Times (Feb. 3, 2023) (online at www.nytimes.com/2023/02/03/nyregion/fbi- 
intelligence-charged-albania html). 


654 Td. 


65 How Prosecutors Say a Top F-B.I. Agent Sold His Services Overseas, New York Times (Feb. 3, 2023) 
(online at www nytimes.com/2023/02/03/nyregion/fbi-intelligence-charged-albania.html). 


656 Id, 


657 Ex-FBI Counterspy Chief McGonigal Pleads Guilty in Payment Plot, Washington Post (Sept. 22, 2023) 
(online at www.washingtonpost.com/dc-md-va/2023/09/22/fbi-counterspy-mcgonigal-plea/); Department of Justice, 
Press Release: Retired FBI Special Agent in Charge Pleads Guilty to Concealing Information from the FBI (Sept. 
22, 2023) (online at www.justice.gov/opa/pr/retired-fbi-special-agent-charge-pleads-guilty-concealing-information- 
fbi); Indictment United States v. McGonigal, No. 1:23 00021 (D.D.C. Jan. 18, 2023) (online at 
www. justice. gov/usao-de/press-release/file/1563516/download); How Prosecutors Say a Top F-B.I. Agent Sold His 
Services Overseas, New York Times (Feb. 3, 2023) (online at www nytimes.com/2023/02/03/nyregion/fbi- 


142 


Emoluments Paid by Albania to Trump-Owned Businesses 


Prime Minister Rama chose to patronize the Trump International Hotel in Washington, 
D.C., during his March 2017 visit. Over the course of two nights, Mr. Rama and his aides spent 
$3,474 at the hotel. They stayed on the same floor as Mr. Neza.°° 


There is no indication in the records produced by Mazars that Mr. McGonigal stayed at 
Trump International Hotel during this period in March 2017. 


Separately, Mr. Dorjan Ducka, another Rama advisor, booked four rooms over two nights 
at Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C. on January 18 and January 19, 2018, at a cost 
of $1,503.°° 


The Mazars records further show that Albania’s then-Minister of Infrastructure and 
Energy, Damian Gjiknuri, stayed at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., from 
June 24 through June 26, 2018, spending $1,025.°° 


intelligence-charged-albania html). 


658 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00016568; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00016569; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00016576; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00016577. 


69 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00028926; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00028930. 


60 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017647; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017657; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017669; MINISTRIA E INFRASTRUKTURES DHE 
ENERGJISE, Minister of Infrastructure and Energy, Albania, Press Release: Minister Gjiknuri in Washington, 
Meetings at the State Department (Feb. 6, 2018) (online at www.infrastruktura.gov.al/en/minister-gjiknuri-in- 
washington-meetings-at-the-state-departmen/); Albanian PM Reshuffles Cabinet After Student Protests, Reuters 
(Dec. 28, 2018) (online at www.reuters.com/article/us-albania-government-reshuffle/albanian-pm-reshuffles- 
cabinet-after-student-protests-idUSKCNIORICW). 


143 


KOSOVO 


During the Trump Administration, Kosovo sought to leverage U.S. support in order to 
gain greater international recognition, including from neighboring Serbia. The Mazars records 
show that several officials from Kosovo’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs—including the then- 
Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, Behgjet Pacolli—stayed at the Trump International 
Hotel in Washington, D.C., in July 2018, spending nearly $5,000 at the hotel. Social media 
posts indicate that other Kosovar officials again visited the property later in the Trump 
Administration, but Mazars did not produce any documents to the Committee regarding that 
visit. Kosovo eventually signed an economic cooperation agreement with Serbia at a White 
House event over which then-President Trump presided. 


Kosovar Emolument Spending at Trump Properties 


Date Location Expenditure Amount 
July 25—26, 2018 | Trump International Hotel Stay by Deputy Prime $990°°! 
(Washington, D.C.) Minister and Foreign 
Minister of Kosovo 
Behgjet Pacolli 
July 25-28, 2018 | Trump International Hotel | Stay by additional officials $3,960°° 
(Washington, D.C.) of the Kosovo Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs 
EMOLUMENTS PAID BY KOSOVO $4,950 
(2018) 


In the former Yugoslavia, Kosovo had been “an autonomous province of Serbia.”°° 


While Serbians consider Kosovo to be “the birthplace of their nation,” more than 90% of the 
population of Kosovo is ethnically Albanian.“ A CRS report explains that by 1998, “growing 
ethnic unrest and violence in Kosovo, promoted by the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), led 
Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic to launch a counterinsurgency campaign against the ethnic 
Albanian and Kosovar communities in Kosovo.”°© According to the State Department, “Serbian 
forces and paramilitaries implemented a systematic campaign to ethnically cleanse Kosovo.” 


661 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017891; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017900. 

662 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017891; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017900; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017910; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017911; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017919; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017920. 


63 Congressional Research Service, Kosovo: Background and U.S. Relations (Aug. 13, 2018) (online at 
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R44979/1 1). 


64 Kosovo: Why Is Violence Flaring Between Ethnic Serbs and Albanians, BBC (Oct. 2, 2023) (online at 
www.bbc.com/news/62382069). 


65 Congressional Research Service, Kosovo: Background and U.S. Relations (Aug. 13, 2018) (online at 
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R44979/1 1). 


666 Department of State, Ethnic Cleansing in Kosovo: An Accounting, (Dec. 1999) (online at https://1997- 
144 


Thousands were killed and “[o]ver 1.5 million Kosovar Albanians—at least 90 percent of the 
estimated 1998 Kosovar Albanian population of Kosovo—were forcibly expelled from their 
homes.”°°’ The United States joined NATO in an air campaign in an effort to end the 
humanitarian crisis.’ According to CRS, the NATO operation “ultimately forced the Serbs to 
agree to withdraw their military and police forces from Kosovo.”° 


In 2008, Kosovo declared its independence from Serbia, and by 2018, Kosovo had been 
“recognized by over 110 countries worldwide, including the United States,” but “Serbia ha[d] 
refused to recognize Kosovo’s independence, as ha[d] Russia, China, and several EU 
countries.”°”° 


As part of Kosovo’s campaign to garner greater American support for its effort to secure 
international recognition, a delegation from the Kosovar government—including then-President 
Hashim Tha¢i—visited the United States in January 2017, where they reportedly met with 
several Republican Members of Congress and tried to initiate a relationship with the incoming 
Trump Administration.°”' As reported in Balkan Insight, the government of Kosovo—which had 
“long seen the Democrats as their country’s natural allies in US politics”—was “keen to remind 
whoever runs Washington of their staunchly pro-American credentials.”°” 


The government of Kosovo also used U.N. General Assembly meetings as opportunities 
to meet with world leaders and advance its effort to gain greater international recognition for the 
country. While in New York for the 2017 and 2019 General Assembly meetings, then-President 
Thaci met with then-President Trump.°” Media reports indicate that Behgjet Pacolli, who was 
then Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Kosovo, was part of the Kosovo delegation 
attending the 2017 and 2019 U.N. meetings.°”* 


2001.state.gov/global/human_rights/kosovoii/pdf/kosovii.pdf). 
667 Td. 


668 North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Kosovo Air Campaign (March—June 1999) (May 17, 2022) (online 
at www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/topics_49602.htm). 


69 Congressional Research Service, Kosovo: Background and U.S. Relations (Aug. 13, 2018) (online at 
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R44979/10). 


670 Td, 


671 Ambassador Reminds Trump That Kosovo Loves America, Balkan Insight (Jan. 18, 2017) (online at 
https://balkaninsight.com/2017/01/18/kosovo-ambassador-in-us-brief-talk-with-trump-01-18-2017/). 


672 Td. 


673 Thaci Meets with U.S. President Donald Trump, Euronews. Albania (Sept. 25, 2019) (online at 
https://euronews.al/en/president-of-kosovo-meets-u-s-president-donald-trump/); President Thaci Meets US 
President Trump, Prishtina Insight (Sept. 20, 2017) (online at https://prishtinainsight.com/president-thaci-meets-us- 
president-trump/). 


64 Thagi Meets with U.S. President Donald Trump, Euronews. Albania (Sept. 25, 2019) (online at 
https://euronews.al/en/president-of-kosovo-meets-u-s-president-donald-trump/); President Thaci Meets US 
President Trump, Prishtina Insight (Sept. 20, 2017) (online at https://prishtinainsight.com/president-thaci-meets-us- 
president-trump/); Congressional Research Service, Kosovo: Background and U.S. Relations (Aug. 13, 2018) 
(online at https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R44979/1 1). 


145 


Brian Ballard—a Trump fundraiser and D.C. lobbyist—reported in a filing with the DOJ 
pursuant to FARA that he began to represent Kosovo on December 22, 2017.°” In June 2018, 
Politico reported that Ballard had “personally lobbied Trump” on behalf of the county in April 
2018.°"6 


The Trump Administration apparently proved interested in helping Kosovo and Serbia 
improve their relationship. In December 2018, Trump reportedly wrote to Thagi and Serbian 
President Aleksandar Vucic, “dangling a potential Rose Garden peace ceremony if they could 
resolve their differences.”°”’ In October 2019, shortly after that year’s U.N. General Assembly, 
then-President Trump appointed the U.S. Ambassador to Germany, Richard Grenell, to serve in 
an additional role as the “special envoy for peace negotiations between Serbia and Kosovo.”°” 


In September 2020, at a White House event over which then-President Trump presided, 
Serbia and Kosovo signed an agreement “to normalize economic ties[.]” The agreement did not, 
however, provide for the full diplomatic recognition that Kosovo sought and that the Trump 
Administration and European Union had reportedly supported.°” 


In October 2020, Forbes reported: 


President Donald Trump added a new line to his foreign policy resume this week, 
repeatedly insisting he brokered an end to the violent conflict between Serbia and 
Kosovo, even though the Kosovo War ended more than two decades ago—a bizarre and 
inaccurate claim as the president looks to tout his dealmaking skills in the final week of 
the campaign. °°? 


For example, speaking at a rally in Omaha, Nebraska, on October 27, 2020, then- 
President Trump referred to the arrangement between Kosovo and Serbia signed in the Oval 
Office. He said: 


675 Department of Justice, Supplemental Statement Pursuant to the Foreign Agents Registration Act of 
1938, as Amended (May 31, 2018) (online at https://efile.fara.gov/docs/6415-Supplemental-Statement-20 18053 1- 
2.pdf). 


676 Ballard Lobbied Trump on Kosovo, Politico (June 6, 2018) (online at 
www.politico.com/newsletters/politico-influence/20 1 8/06/06/ballard-lobbied-trump-on-kosovo-244463). 


677 Serbia and Kosovo Sign Breakthrough Economic Accord that is Short of Normal Relations, Washington 
Post (Sept. 4, 2020) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-kosovo-serbia- 
agreement/2020/09/04/b1283f8c-eec0- 1 1ea-99a1-71343d03bce29_story html). 


678 Trump Names Ric Grenell His Special Envoy for Serbia and Kosovo, Politico (Oct. 4, 2019) (online at 
www.politico.eu/article/trump-names-ric-grenell-his-special-envoy-for-serbia-and-kosovo/); Thagi Meets with U.S. 
President Donald Trump, Euronews. Albania (Sept. 25, 2019) (online at https://euronews.al/en/president-of-kosovo- 
meets-u-s-president-donald-trump/#!). 


6 Serbia and Kosovo Sign Breakthrough Economic Accord that is Short of Normal Relations, Washington 
Post (Sept. 4, 2020) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-kosovo-serbia- 
agreement/2020/09/04/b1283f8c-eec0-1 lea-99a1-71343d03bce29_story html). 


680 Trump Takes Credit for Ending Kosovo War, Which Ended In 1999, Forbes (Oct. 28, 2020) (online at 
www forbes.com/sites/joewalsh/2020/10/28/trump-takes-credit-for-ending-kosovo-war-which-ended-in-1999/). 


146 


You know what, it took about 20 minutes. They’d been fighting for 40 years. I think 
they’d been fighting for 400 years, you want to know the truth. But they’d been fighting 
for a long time. They want to make a deal. All of a sudden, two months ago, they’re in 
the oval office hugging the two prime ministers [. . .] hugging and kissing.**! 


Then-President Trump also said that, as a result of the deal, “We save a lot of lives, that’s 
a good thing,”°*? 


Total Kosovar Emolument Spending 


Records produced to the Committee by Mazars show that Kosovo’s then-Deputy Prime 
Minister and Foreign Minister Pacolli stayed at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, 
D.C., on July 25 and July 26, 2018. He was accompanied by two other officials from the 
Kosovo Ministry of Foreign Affairs, including Jetlir Zyberaj, an advisor to Mr. Pacolli; both of 
these officials stayed at the hotel for additional days after it appears that Mr. Pacolli had left. 
Together, all of the rooms booked by the Kosovar officials at the hotel cost $4,950.°** 


A social media post indicates that approximately two years later, then-Kosovar Justice 
Minister Selim Selimi and then-Kosovar Foreign Minister Meliza Haradinaj (who was Foreign 
Minister of Kosovo subsequent to Pacolli) met with Ambassador Grenell at the Trump 
International Hotel in Washington, D.C., in 2020 at or about the time Serbia and Kosovo signed 
the economic normalization deal at the White House.°** The Committee has not received any 
documents from Mazars indicating whether or not the Kosovar officials made payments to 
Trump-owned entities during this time. 


681 President Trump Campaign Rally in Omaha, Nebraska, C-SPAN (Oct. 27, 2020) (online at www.c- 
span.org/video/?477342- 1/president-trump-campaign-rally-omaha-nebraska). 


682 Td. 


683 Kosovo Bans Serbian Officials in New Diplomatic Dispute, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (July 4, 
2019) (online at www.rferl.org/a/kosovo-bans-serbian-officials-in-new-diplomatic-dispute/30037050 html). 


684 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017891; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017900; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017910; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE- 
00017911; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017919; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE- 
00017920. 


685 Adriatik Kelemendi, Facebook (Sept. 5, 2020) (online at 
www facebook.com/adriatik kelmendi/posts/pfbid02rJEdPxW2P4BxBc77yS 1 CuSq5zqACEpWNimF f4Jdts4S VZpn 
S7eEINDXRtnU9GxqgW1); Meliza Haradinaj (@MelizaHaradinaj), X (formerly Twitter) (Sept. 5, 2020) (online at 
https://x.com/MelizaHaradinaj/status/130222560088782848 1 ?s=20); Haradinaj-Stublla Resigns as Foreign Minister 
and Quits AAK, Prishtina Insight (Mar. 9, 2021) (online at https://prishtinainsight.com/haradinaj-stublla-resigns-as- 
foreign-minister-and-quits-aak/); Kosovo American Education Fund, Facebook (June 5, 2020) (online at 
www facebook.com/kaefonline/photos/a.10150263607456156/10157181290271156/?type=3). 


147 


ADDITIONAL EMOLUMENT SPENDING 


The ledgers provided to the Committee by Mazars record several additional governments 
whose officials patronized President Trump’s businesses while he was in office. These 
emoluments are enumerated below. 


Date Location Expenditure Amount 
2018 Trump World Tower Permanent Mission of $38,302°°° 
(New York, NY) Afghanistan (2018) 
Estimated Total 
Emolument for 
4 Years: 
$153,208 
(2017-2020) 
February 23-25, | Trump International Hotel Khan Agha Rezayee, $1,542°°’ 
2018 (Washington, D.C.) Member of Parliament 
from Kabul, Afghanistan 
September 24—_ | Trump International Hotel | Self-Declared Turkish $8,800°° 
27, 2017 (Washington, D.C.) Republic of Northern 
Cyprus 
February 6-7, | Trump International Hotel | | Kornelios Korneliou, $590? 
2018 (Washington, D.C.) Permanent Representative 
of the Republic of 
Cyprus to the United 
Nations 
October 11-12, | Trump International Hotel Timur Suleimenoy, $1,050°° 
2017 (Washington, D.C.) Minister of National 


Economy of Kazakhstan 


686 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027356; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027402; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027449; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027498; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027556; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027613; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027707; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027661; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027754; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027796; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-000027839; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE- 
00027884. 


687 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00019372; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00019379; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00019384. 


688 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018392; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018400; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_ COMMITTEE-00018411; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018412; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE-00018423. 


689 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00019247; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00019252. 


60 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018542; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018553. 


148 


October 11-14, | Trump International Hotel Daniyar Akishey, $19,211°! 
2017 and April (Washington, D.C.) Governor of the National 
17-21, 2018 Bank of Kazakhstan; and 
additional officials from 
the National Bank of 
Kazakhstan 
(stays for each person 
varied within the specified 
time frames) 
October 11-12, | Trump International Hotel Arman Sapargaliyev, $1,050°” 
2017 (Washington, D.C.) Second Secretary at the 
Embassy of Kazakhstan 
in the U.S. 
May 28-31, 2018 | Trump International Hotel | Adil Mukhamejanoy, $1,411°° 
(Washington, D.C.) Chairman of the 
Management Board of 
Kazakhstan Housing 
Company 
May 29-31, 2018 | Trump International Hotel | Ainur Kuatova, Managing $1,050°" 
(Washington, D.C.) Director and member of 
the Executive Board of 
Baiterek National 
Managing Holding 
(Kazakhstan) 
July 24-25, 2018 | Trump International Hotel Embassy of Lebanon $7,720° 
(Washington, D.C.) 
August 18-24, Trump International Hotel Grisada Boonrach, $11,340°° 
2018 (Washington, D.C.) Minister for Agriculture 


61 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018546; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018554; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018557; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018558; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018564; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018566; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_ COMMITTEE-00018567; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018568; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_ COMMITTEE-00016982; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017007; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017022, MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE- 
00017036; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017037; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017052. 


62 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018543; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018554. 


63 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017410; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017415; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017421; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017428. 


64 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017417; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017422; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017430. 


65 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017883; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017894; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017895. 


66 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018079; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
149 


and Cooperatives of 
Thailand and additional 
officials from the 
Government of Thailand 
(stays for each person 
varied within the specified 


time periods) 
October 7-15, Trump International Hotel | Bayartsaikhan Nadmid, $8,486°’ 
2017 and April (Washington, D.C.) Governor, Bank of 
17-23, 2018 Mongolia 
April 24-25, Trump International Hotel | Gyérgy Janos Barcza, $1,011° 
2018 (Washington, D.C.) Chief Executive Officer, 


Government Debt 
Management Agency of 


Hungary 
October 11-15, | Trump International Hotel Ilmars Rimsevics, $2,739° 
2017 (Washington, D.C.) Governor, Bank of Latvia 


e Afghanistan spent money at both Trump World Tower in New York and the Trump 
International Hotel in Washington, D.C., during then-President Trump’s term. The 


Permanent Mission of Afghanistan maintained a unit at Trump World Tower throughout 


the Trump presidency, incurring $38,302 in common monthly charges for that unit in 
2018—as noted, the only year for which Mazars provided records of expenditures at 


Trump World Tower.’”° Assuming the monthly charges did not change during President 


00018088; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_ COMMITTEE-00018089; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018095; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018100; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT _COMMITTEE- 
00018106; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018113; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT _COMMITTEE- 
00018124. 


67 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018509; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018516; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018526; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018536; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_ COMMITTEE-00018548; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018559; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018569; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018577; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018582; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00016978; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE-00017001; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017020; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017034; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017049; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017064; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017072. 


6°8 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017082; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017094. 


69 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018541; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018557; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018566; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018575; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018581. 


70 New York City Department of Finance, Document ID: 2009082401334002 (Aug. 21, 2009) (online at 
https://a836-acris.nyc.gov/DS/DocumentSearch/DocumentImageView?doc_id=2009082401334002) (accessed Dec. 
7, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 2016-2017, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, 
Lot: 1212 (Jan. 5, 2016) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 2017- 


2018, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1212 (Jan. 5, 2017) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City 
150 


Trump’s four-year term, this report estimates that Afghanistan spent $153,208 on 
common monthly charges for the unit during President Trump’s time in office.”°! In 
addition, the records provided by Mazars show that Khan Agha Rezayee, a Member of 
Afghanistan’s Parliament, paid $1,542 for a stay at the Trump International Hotel in 
Washington, D.C., in late February 2018.7 


e Officials from the self-declared Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus rented multiple 
rooms at Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., from September 24 through 
September 27, 2017, spending $8,800.”°° A militarized “green line” divides the island of 
Cyprus, separating the Turkish-controlled northern sector from the southern, 
predominantly Greek-speaking nation of the Republic of Cyprus. Turkish control of the 
northern enclave is not recognized by any other nation. The U.N. peace-keeping mission 
on Cyprus is one of the longest running in U.N. history.’™ 


e Kornelios Korneliou, a member of the diplomatic service of the Republic of Cyprus, 
patronized the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., on at least one occasion, 
spending $590 for two nights in early February 2018. At the time, he was Cyprus’s 
Permanent Representative to the U.N.’ 


Department of Finance, Assessment Roll 2018-2019, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1212 (Jan. 5, 2018) 
(accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2019-2020, Borough: 
Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1212 (Jan. 5, 2019) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023); New York City Department of Finance, 
Final Assessment Roll 2020-2021, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 1340, Lot: 1212 (Jan. 5, 2020) (accessed Dec. 6, 
2023); New York City Department of Finance, Final Assessment Roll 2021-2022, Borough: Manhattan, Block: 
1340, Lot: 1212 (Jan. 5, 2021) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023) 


71 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027356; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027402; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027449; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027498; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_ COMMITTEE-00027556; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027613; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027707; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027661; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027754; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027796; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00027839; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00027884. 


72 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00019372; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00019379; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00019384; Khan Rezayee, LinkedIn (online at 
https://af.linkedin.com/in/khan-rezayee-58578b47) (accessed Oct. 31, 2023); Young, Modern Afghans Fear ‘Losing 
Everything’ as Taliban Regains Ground, PBS (July 14, 2021) (online at www.pbs.org/newshour/show/young- 
modern-afghans-fear-losing-everything-as-taliban-regains-ground). 


73 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018392; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018400; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018411; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE- 
00018412; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018423. 


14 Erdogan ’s Visit to Northern Cyprus Stokes Decades-Long Dispute, New York Times (Nov. 17, 2020) 
(online at www nytimes.com/2020/11/15/world/europe/cyprus-turkey-erdogan.html). 


75 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00019247; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00019252; Kornelius S. Korneliou, LinkedIn (online at https://il.linkedin.com/in/kornelios-s-korneliou- 
2337633b/en) (accessed Oct. 31, 2023); Embassy of the Republic of Cyprus in Tel Aviv, Ambassador Kornelios S. 
Korneliou, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Cyprus (online at 
http://www mfa.gov.cy/mfa/embassies/embassy_telaviv.nsf/DMLambassador_en/DMLambassador_en) (accessed 
Oct. 31, 2023). 


151 


In addition, records produced to the Committee by Mazars also show that in May 2018, 
the International Coordinating Committee — Justice for Cyprus (PSEKA), an advocacy 
group that condemns the Turkish occupation of Northern Cyprus, held a conference at the 
Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., and spent $11,421 on rooms.”°° The 
explicit purpose of the gathering was to influence then-President Trump. News reports 
stated that the Cyprus News Agency, a partially government-funded news outlet, claimed 
its members were looking “into ways of exerting influence on US President Donald 
Trump with a view to averting the Islamization of the Turkish occupied part of Cyprus.” 
Reportedly, at least three foreign government officials attended the gathering, including 
the mayors of two Cypriot towns and a member of the Greek parliament. The head of 
PSEKA opened the event by stating: “Trump is not a politician, and we hope that he can 
get the message.””°7 


e The Republic of Kazakhstan, including nine government officials, spent at least 
$21,311 at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C, in the fall of 2017 and the 
spring of 2018. These officials included the Kazakh Minister of National Economy, 
Timur Suleimenoy, and other officials from the National Bank of Kazakhstan, including 
its Chairman, Daniyar Akishev. The Second Secretary of the Embassy of Kazakhstan, 
Arman Sapargaliyev, also stayed at the hotel.’°> The names of the Minister, the 
Chairman, and the other officials from the National Bank of Kazakhstan appear among 
the “Accredited Members of the Delegations at the 2017 Annual Meetings” included in 
the “Summary Proceedings” of the World Bank’s “2017 Annual Meetings of the Boards 
of Governors,” which were held between October 13 and October 15, 2017.” Ainur 


6 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017355; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017366; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017376; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017377; PSEKA International Coordinating Committee Justice for Cyprus, About PSEKA (online at 
https://pseka.org/about/) (accessed Oct. 27, 2023). 


77 Delegation From Mueller-Scrutinized Cyprus Gets Sweet Deal at Trumps D.C. Hotel, The Daily Beast 
(June 18, 2018) (online at www.thedailybeast.com/delegation-from-mueller-scrutinized-cyprus-gets-sweet-deal-at- 
trumps-dc-hotel); PSEKA Conference Delegates Highlight Need to Inform US Administration about the Danger of 
Occupied Cyprus’ Islamization, Parikiaki (May 23, 2018) (online at www.parikiaki.com/2018/05/pseka-conference- 
delegates-highlight-need-to-inform-us-administration-about-the-danger-of-occupied-cyprus-islamization/). 


T8MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018542; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018543; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018546; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018553. MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018554; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018557; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018558; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018564; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018566; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018567; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018568; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00016982; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017007; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017022, MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017036; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017037; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017052; Kazakh President Appoints New Foreign Minister, 
Minister of National Economy, Astana Times (Dec. 29, 2016) (online at https://astanatimes.com/2016/12/kazakh- 
president-appoints-new-foreign-minister-minister-of-national-economy/); Official Website of the President of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan, Events — Meeting with the Chairman of the National Bank of Kazakhstan Daniyer Akishev 
(Aug. 3, 2016) (online at www.akorda.kz/en/events/akorda_news/meetings_and_receptions/meeting-with-chairman- 
of-the-national-bank-of-kazakhstan-daniyar-akishev-5); U.S. Department of State, Embassy of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan (Archived Content from Jan. 20, 2009 to Jan. 20, 2017) (online at https://2009- 
2017.state.gov/s/cpr/rls/dpl/22 1208 htm#K). 


79 The World Bank Group, 2017 Annual Meetings of the Boards of Governors Summary Proceedings (Oct. 
152 


Kuatova, Managing Director and member of the Executive Board of the state-owned 
Baiterek National Managing Holding, stayed at the hotel in late May 2018, spending 
$1,050.”'° Also staying at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., in late 
May 2018, was Adil Mukhamejanov, Chairman of the Management Board of Kazakhstan 
Housing Company, who spent $1,411.7"! 


e The records provided to the Committee by Mazars indicate that the Embassy of 
Lebanon made two expenditures at a Trump-owned property. “Embassy of Lebanon 
Transient Bookings” appears on a list of embassies that had accounts at a Trump-owned 
property. The “Start Date” for this account was March 20, 2017—just weeks after 
President Trump took office.’!* Mazars did not provide any documents showing the 
amount of or services provided for this expenditure, or the specific location of the 
expenditure. The second expenditure was made at the Trump International Hotel in 
Washington, D.C., on the nights of July 24 and July 25, 2018, when the Embassy of 
Lebanon booked nine rooms at a cost of $7,720." 


e The Minister for Agriculture and Cooperatives of Thailand, Grisada Boonrach, stayed at 
the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., on the nights of August 18 to August 
22, 2018. He was accompanied by additional officials from the Government of Thailand 
who stayed at the hotel on the nights of August 18 through August 24, 2018. Together, 
they spent $11,340 at the hotel.’! 


e The Governor of the Bank of Mongolia, Bayartsaikhan Nadmid, stayed at the Trump 
International Hotel in Washington, D.C., on the nights of October 7 through October 15, 


13-15, 2017) (online at https://documents!.worldbank.org/curated/es/40000152762099973 1/pdf/2017-Summary- 
Proceedings-cleared-by-YT-05232018.pdf). 


710 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017417; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE- 
00017422; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017430; Ainur Kuatova, LinkedIn (online at 
https://kz.linkedin.com/in/ainur-kuatova-7a3a2b6) (accessed Oct. 31, 2023). 


™1 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017410; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017415; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017421; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017428; Baiterek, Mukhamejanov Adil Bektasovich, Deputy Chairman of the Management Board (online at 
https://baiterek.gov kz/en/about-holding/management/management/mukhamedzhanov-adil-bektasovich/) (accessed 
Oct. 31, 2023). 


712 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00008041. 


713 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017883; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017894; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017895. 


74 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018079; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018088; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018089; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018095; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018100; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018106; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018113; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018124; Thai Cabinet Reshuffle Underlines Junta’s Bid to Reach Farmers, Nikkei Asia (Nov. 17, 2017) (online at 
https://asia.nikkei.com/Politics/Thai-cabinet-reshuffle-underlines-junta-s-bid-to-reach-farmers); Committee on 
World Food Security, Forty-Fifth Session (Oct. 15-19, 2018) (online at www.gisa-unr.com/pdf/fao2018- 
delegados.pdf). 


153 


2017, and again on the nights of April 17 through April 23, 2018, spending a combined 
total of $8,486. ’'° 


e The Chief Executive Officer of the Government Debt Management Agency of Hungary, 
Gyorgy Janos Barcza, stayed at the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., on 
the nights of April 24 and April 25, 2018, spending $1,011.’ 


e The Governor of the Bank of Latvia, IImars Rimsevics, stayed at the Trump International 
Hotel in Washington, D.C., from October 11 through October 15, 2017, spending $2,739. 
By virtue of his position at the Bank of Latvia, Mr. Rimsevics was also on the governing 
council of the European Central Bank. 7"’ 


15 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018509; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018516; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018526; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018536; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018548; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018559; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018569; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018577; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018582; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00016978; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017001; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017020; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017034; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017049; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017064; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017072;Mongolia Governor Replaced Two Years Before End of Term, Central Banking (July 21, 2016) (online at 
www.centralbanking.com/central-banking/news/2465628/mongolia-governor-replaced-two-years-before-end-of- 
term); The World Bank Group, 2017 Annual Meetings of the Board of Governors Summary Proceedings (Oct. 13— 
15, 2017) (online at https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/es/40000152762099973 1/pdf/2017-Summary- 
Proceedings-cleared-by- YT-05232018.pdf). 


6 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00017082; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00017094; Gyérgy Barcza (online at https://hu.linkedin.com/in/gy%C3%Bérgy-barcza-820623 1b9) (accessed Oct. 
10, 2023); Allamadossag Kezelé Kézpont Zrt., Goals, Activities, and Legal Framework (Apt. 7, 2020) (online at 
https://akk .hu/introduction/goals-activities-legal); The World Bank Group, 20/6 Sovereign Debt Management 
Forum: Sovereign Debt Management in Emerging Markets: Is the Party Over? (Oct. 19-20, 2016) (online at 
www.worldbank.org/en/events/2017/09/27/20 1 6-sovereign-debt-management-forum). 


17 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018541; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018557; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018566; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE- 
00018575; MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-00018581; Former ECB Governor to Testify on Bribery 
Allegations, Reuters (July 4, 2023) (online at www.reuters.com/world/europe/former-ecb-governor-testify-bribery- 
allegations-2023-07-04/); ECB Slams Latvia for Banning Rimsevics Before Criminal Case, Bloomberg (Sept. 25, 
2018) (online at www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/20 1 8-09-25/ecb-slams-latvia-for-banning-rimsevics-before- 
criminal-case); ECB Seeks EU Court Ruling on Latvian Central Bank Governor, New York Daily News (Apr. 7, 
2018) (online at www nydailynews.com/2018/04/06/ecb-seeks-eu-court-ruling-on-latvian-central-bank-governor/). 


154 


ADDITIONAL COUNTRIES WITH ACCOUNTS AT TRUMP-OWNED BUSINESSES 


In addition to the documents recording the emoluments included in this report, the 
records produced to the Committee by Mazars include an email from Michael Levchuck, the 
“Area Director of Finance” for the Trump International Hotel and Tower in New York and the 
Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., to Donald Bender at Mazars, which includes an 
attachment referred to as an “Embassy List from HMS.”7'® This list identifies more than a dozen 
countries that apparently had accounts at a Trump property. For several of the countries and 
events on the list—such as the “Embassy of the Philippines National Day Reception” and the 
“Embassy of Malaysia Delegation”—Mazars produced records that provide at least some basic 
details on the expenditures. However, the list includes the following country/event accounts 
with “start dates” after Donald Trump had been elected President but for which Mazars produced 
no other records to the Committee: 


e “Embassy of Azeirbaijan [sic] 12/14/16- Conference of Presidents” (start date 
12/14/2016); 


e “Embassy of Georgia Delegation” (start date 03/30/2017); 

e “Embassy of Namibia VIP Visit” (start date 06/09/2017); 

e “Embassy of Romania VIP Visit” (start date 05/31/2017, end date 06/11/2017); and 
e “United States Embassy — Costa Rica” (start date 05/01/2017).’ 

Given the absence of relevant records, this report cannot determine the purposes and 


amounts of these countries’ expenditures at Trump-owned properties during President Trump’s 
term. 


18 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-0008040. 
19 MAZARS-OVERSIGHT_COMMITTEE-0008041. 


155 


CONCLUSION 


This report has documented the payment of many millions of dollars in unconstitutional 
emoluments to Trump-owned businesses from at least 20 foreign governments as well as entities 
and lobbyists acting on their behalf. As noted, given the incompleteness of the documents 
received by the Committee and Chairman Comer’s decision to act in concert with former 
President Trump’s attorneys to block the production of additional records, this total is likely but 
a small fraction of the full universe of foreign emolument spending that took place during the 
Trump presidency in violation of the U.S. Constitution. 


President Trump’s pervasive use of the presidency for personal financial gain is 
particularly alarming given not only the significant dollar amounts and multiplicity of countries 
involved, but also former President Trump’s repeated indications of his willingness to allow his 
personal financial interest to dictate policy decisions he made as President. The rich profits that 
Trump businesses reaped from those countries, at best, leaves subject to question whether the 
often favorable treatment they received from the Trump Administration resulted from the former 
President’s bona fide judgment about advancing the vital interests of the United States, or his 
desire to perpetuate the substantial personal enrichment he enjoyed from the lavish emolument 
spending by those countries. 


As he accepted these payments, Mr. Trump ignored the Foreign Emolument Clause’s 
explicit requirement that he obtain congressional authorization before pocketing such gifts— 
never even seeking, let alone securing, the consent of Congress to his receipt of these large-scale 
emoluments. No president has ever come so close to brazenly ignoring the Foreign Emoluments 
Clause. 


These facts demonstrate the need for urgent congressional action to prevent future 
presidents and senior officials from serving under similarly grave conflicts of interest and 
unconstitutional arrangements. Accordingly, this report recommends that Congress 
expeditiously consider adopting measures that would require presidents and senior executive 
officials to disclose to Congress their receipt of any foreign emoluments, set forth an explicit 
procedure for presidents and senior officials to seek the requisite congressional authorization for 
the receipt and retention of emoluments, and require the disclosure of payments to entities in 
which a sitting president has a financial interest “of any kind whatever” by officials and lobbyists 
acting on behalf of kings, princes, and foreign governments. 


156 


